

[page 1]
Best Choices 
Good Choices
Anchovy
Atlantic croaker
Atlantic mackerel
Black sea bass
Butterfish 
Catfish 
Clam 
Cod
Crab 
Crawfish 
Flounder
Haddock
Hake
Herring 
Lobster, 
American and spiny 
Mullet
Oyster
Pacific chub 
mackerel
Perch, freshwater 
and ocean 
Pickerel
Plaice
Pollock 
Salmon
Sardine
Scallop 
Shad 
Shrimp 
Skate
Smelt
Sole 
Squid 
Tilapia 
Trout, freshwater
Tuna, canned light 
(includes skipjack)
Whitefish
Whiting
Bluefish
Buffalofish
Carp
Chilean sea bass/
Patagonian toothfish
Grouper
Halibut
Mahi mahi/dolphinfish
Monkfish
Rockfish 
Sablefish
Sheepshead
Snapper
Spanish mackerel
Striped bass (ocean)
 
Tilefish 
(Atlantic Ocean)
Tuna, albacore/
white tuna, canned 
and fresh/frozen
Tuna, yellowfin
Weakfish/seatrout
White croaker/
Pacific croaker
Choices to Avoid HIGHEST MERCURY LEVELS
King mackerel
Marlin
Orange roughy
Shark
Swordfish
Tilefish 
(Gulf of Mexico)
Tuna, bigeye
What about fish caught by family or friends? Check for fish and shellfish advisories to tell you how often you can safely eat those 
fish. If there is no advisory, eat only one serving and no other fish that week. Some fish caught by family and friends, such as larger carp, 
catfish, trout and perch, are more likely to have fish advisories due to mercury or other contaminants.
Best Choices
Good Choices
Choices  to  Avoid
Choose a variety of fish that are lower in mercury.
While it is important to limit mercury in the diets of those who are pregnant or breastfeeding and 
children, many types of fish are both nutritious and lower in mercury.
Fish‡ provide key nutrients that 
support a child’s brain development.
ADVICE ABOUT EATING FISH
For Those Who Might Become or Are Pregnant or Breastfeeding 
and Children Ages 1 – 11 Years
‡ This advice refers to fish and shellfish collectively as “fish” / Advice revised October 2021
Childhood: 
On average, a serving is about:
1 ounce at age 1 to 3
2 ounces at age 4 to 7
3 ounces at age 8 to 10
4 ounces at age 11
Eat 2 servings a week from the “Best Choices” list.
What is a serving? As a guide, use the palm of your hand.
Pregnancy and breastfeeding: 
1 serving is 4 ounces
Eat 2 to 3 servings a week 
from the “Best Choices” list 
(OR 1 serving from the “Good Choices” list).
This chart can help you choose which fish to eat, and how often to eat them, based on their mercury levels.
Fish are part of a healthy eating pattern and provide key nutrients during pregnancy, 
breastfeeding, and/or early childhood to support a child’s brain development: 
•	 Omega-3 (called DHA and EPA) and omega-6 fats
•	 Iron
•	 Iodine (during pregnancy)
•	 Choline 
Choline also supports development of the baby’s spinal cord. Fish provide iron and 
zinc to support children’s immune systems. Fish are a source of other nutrients like 
protein, vitamin B12, vitamin D, and selenium too.
www.FDA.gov/ﬁshadvice
www.EPA.gov/ﬁshadvice

[page 2]
A healthy eating pattern 
consists of choices 
across all food groups 
(vegetables, fruits, grains, 
dairy, and protein foods, 
which includes fish), 
eaten in recommended 
amounts, and within 
calorie needs. Healthy 
eating patterns include 
foods that provide 
vitamins, minerals, and 
other health-promoting 
components and have 
no or little added sugars, 
saturated fat, and sodium.
Eating fish can provide other health benefits too.
Promotion of bone health – 
decreases the risk for hip fractures*
Decreases in the risk of becoming overweight or obese* 
Decreases in the risk for colon and rectal cancers*
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends 
eating fish as part of a healthy eating pattern.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends:
•	 At least 8 ounces of seafood (less for children§) 
per week based on a 2,000 calorie diet.
•	 Those who are pregnant or breastfeeding consume between 
8 and 12 ounces per week of a variety of seafood from 
choices that are lower in mercury.
This advice supports the recommendations of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, which reflects current science on nutrition to improve public health. 
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans focuses on dietary patterns and the effects of food and nutrient characteristics on health.
§ For some children, the amounts of fish in the Dietary Guidelines for Americans are higher than in this FDA/EPA advice. The Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans states that to consume those higher amounts, children should only be fed fish from the “Best Choices” list that are even lower in mercury 
– these fish are anchovies, Atlantic mackerel, catfish, clams, crab, crawfish, flounder, haddock, mullet, oysters, plaice, pollock, salmon, sardines, 
scallops, shad, shrimp, sole, squid, tilapia, trout, and whiting.
* There is moderate scientific evidence of a relationship between the eating pattern as a whole and the potential health benefit.
‡ This advice refers to fish and shellfish collectively as “fish” / Advice revised October 2021
CONTINUED
ADVICE ABOUT EATING FISH
For Those Who Might Become or Are Pregnant or Breastfeeding 
and Children Ages 1 – 11 Years
www.FDA.gov/fishadvice	
www.EPA.gov/fishadvice 
Fish intake during pregnancy is recommended because moderate 
scientific evidence shows it can help your baby’s cognitive development. 
Strong evidence shows that eating fish, as part of a healthy eating 
pattern, may have heart health benefits. Healthy eating patterns that 
include fish may have other benefits too. Moderate scientific evidence 
shows that eating patterns relatively higher in fish but also in other 
foods, including vegetables, fruits, legumes, whole grains, low- or non-
fat dairy, lean meats and poultry, nuts, and unsaturated vegetable oils, 
and lower in red and processed meats, sugar-sweetened foods and 
beverages, and refined grains are associated with: