

[page 1]
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Role of Probiotics in the
Management of Gastrointestinal Disorders
Grace L. Su,1,2 Cynthia W. Ko,3 Premysl Bercik,4 Yngve Falck-Ytter,5,6 Shahnaz Sultan,7
Adam V. Weizman,8 and Rebecca L. Morgan9
1Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 2Gastroenterology Section,
Veterans Administration Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 3Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Washington Medical School, Seattle, Washington; 4Division of Gastroenterology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada; 5Division of Gastroenterology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio;
6Louis Stokes Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio; 7Division of Gastroenterology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota; 8Division of Gastroenterology, Mount Sinai Hospital, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and 9Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
T
his document presents the ofﬁcial recommendations
of the American Gastroenterological Association
(AGA) on the role of probiotics in the management of
gastrointestinal disorders. The guideline was developed by
the AGA Institute’s Clinical Guidelines Committee and
approved by the AGA Governing Board. It is accompanied by
a technical review that provides a detailed synthesis of the
evidence from which these recommendations were formu-
lated.1 To get a better understanding of these guidelines, we
recommend reading the accompanying technical review.
Development of this guideline and the accompanying tech-
nical review was fully funded by the AGA Institute without
additional outside funding. Members of the Guideline Panel
and Technical Review Panel were selected by the AGA
Governing Board in consultation with the Clinical Guidelines
Committee with careful consideration of all Institute of
Medicine recommendations for clinical guideline develop-
ment. A patient representative was also included in the
development and review process and had no recommended
changes. The guideline and accompanying technical review
underwent independent peer review, and a 30-day open
public comment period; all comments were collated by the
AGA staff and were reviewed and carefully considered by
the Guideline Panel and Technical Review teams, respec-
tively. Changes were incorporated in revised documents and
where changes were not accepted, a thoughtful response
document was created. In accordance with the Clinical
Guidelines Committee policies, all clinical guidelines are
reviewed annually at the AGA Clinical Guideline Committee
meeting for new information. The next update for these
guidelines is anticipated in 3 years from publication (2023).
Within the last 20 years, there has been increasing
recognition and interest in the role of the gut microbiome in
gastrointestinal health.2 Deﬁned by the Food and Agricul-
ture Organization of the United Nations and the World
Health Organization as “live microorganisms which when
administered in adequate amounts confer a health beneﬁt
on the host,”3 probiotics hold the promise of an effective
way to alter the microbiome for our beneﬁt. Enthusiasm and
popularity within the community for probiotics has led to a
multibillion-dollar industry worldwide.4 Because probiotics
are not considered drugs in the United States or Europe, the
regulatory status is not the same as would normally
accompany a pharmaceutical product. The industry is
largely unregulated and marketing of product is often
geared directly at consumers without providing direct and
consistent proof of effectiveness.5,6 This has led to wide-
spread use of probiotics with confusing evidence for clinical
efﬁcacy.7 It is estimated that 3.9 million American adults
used some form of probiotics or prebiotics (nutrients that
promote growth or beneﬁcial functions of beneﬁcial mi-
crobes)8 in 2015, an amount that is 4 times that in 2007.9,10
Given widespread use and often biased sources of infor-
mation, it is essential that clinicians have objective guidance
for their patients about the appropriate use of and in-
dications for probiotics.
Although there has been a substantial number of studies
examining probiotics in various gastrointestinal diseases,
the studies have been extremely varied, including differ-
ences in the strain of microbes used, dose, and route of
administration, as well as the research methodology,
including differences in the reporting of end points and
outcomes.5 Furthermore, most of the studies with probiotics
involved a relatively small number of patients compared to
trials
investigating
the
effects
of
pharmacological
in-
terventions. Conclusions drawn from meta-analyses or
systematic reviews can be misleading if different studies
with different patient populations, different reported end
points and outcomes, or different strains or combinations of
probiotics are grouped together inappropriately.7 Within
species, different strains can have widely different activities
and biologic effects. Many immunologic, neurologic, and
biochemical effects of gut microbiota are likely to not only
Abbreviations used in this paper: AGA, American Gastroenterological
Association; CI, conﬁdence interval; GRADE, Grading of Recommenda-
tions Assessment, Development and Evaluation; IBS, irritable bowel syn-
drome; MD, mean difference; NEC, necrotizing enterocolitis; OR, odds
ratio; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RR, relative risk.
Most current article
© 2020 by the AGA Institute
0016-5085/$36.00
https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2020.05.059
Gastroenterology 2020;159:697–705
AGA SECTION

[page 2]
be strain-speciﬁc, but also dose-speciﬁc.6 Furthermore,
combinations of different microbial strains may also have
widely different activities, as some microbial activities are
dependent on interactions between different strains. In
developing this guideline, we have examined the evidence
presented in the accompanying technical review with these
constraints in mind. We prioritized Clostridioides difﬁcile–
associated diseases, inﬂammatory bowel disease, irritable
bowel syndrome, infectious gastroenteritis, and necrotizing
enterocolitis (NEC) because these were conditions for which
probiotics were commonly considered. We focused on
patient-important outcomes, such as induction and main-
tenance of disease, treatment of disease, prevention of
sepsis, and all-cause mortality.
This guideline was developed utilizing a process out-
lined previously.11 Brieﬂy, the AGA process for developing
clinical practice guidelines follows the Grading of Recom-
mendations
Assessment,
Development
and
Evaluation
(GRADE) approach11 and best practices as outlined by the
National Academy of Science (formerly Institute of Medi-
cine).12 A priori, the Guideline Panel and methodologist
identiﬁed and formulated clinically relevant questions about
the use of probiotic formulations for the prevention and
treatment of gastrointestinal diseases (not prebiotic use).
Each research question identiﬁed the population, interven-
tion, comparison, and patient-important outcomes. The
Technical Review Panel initially reviewed and assessed
relevant systematic reviews that addressed the clinical
questions, updating high-quality systematic reviews through
December 2018 to inform the recommendations when
possible.1 For situations in which there was either no recent
systematic review available or the recent systematic review
was not deemed high quality, the Technical Review Panel
conducted the systematic review de novo. The ﬁndings from
each systematic review were assessed using the GRADE
approach and presented in an evidence proﬁle. The Guide-
line Panel and the authors of the technical review met face
to face on May 9, 2019 to discuss the ﬁndings from the
technical review. After this meeting, the Guideline Panel
independently formulated guideline recommendations; the
Technical Review Panel was not involved in the formulating
or ﬁnalizing of recommendations. Although the quality of
evidence (Table 1) was a key factor in determining the
strength of the recommendations (Table 2), the Panel also
considered the balance between the beneﬁts and harms of
the interventions, as well as patients’ values and prefer-
ences, resource use (ie, cost), health equity, acceptability,
and feasibility (the Evidence to Decision Framework). The
recommendations, certainty of evidence, and strength of
recommendations are summarized in Table 3. The guideline
and
technical
review
went
through
a
30-day
public
comment period between February 16, 2020 and March 17,
2020. AGA staff collated the comments, the Guideline Panel
deliberated in their response and, when appropriate,
modiﬁed the document text. We hope to provide clinicians
with clear guidance regarding the appropriate use of spe-
ciﬁc probiotics in the context of speciﬁc gastrointestinal
diseases. The target audience for this guideline includes
health care providers, dietitians, and patients. The guide-
lines include recommendations for speciﬁc populations,
including adults, children, and neonates.
In addition, we were not able to assess the viability of
each formulation reported in the studies, as this information
was not routinely available. We recognize that different
Table 1.Quality of Evidence
Quality
Description
High
We are very conﬁdent that the true effect lies close
to that of the estimate of the effect.
Moderate
We are moderately conﬁdent in the effect estimate.
The true effect is likely to be close to the
estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility
that it is substantially different.
Low
Our conﬁdence in the effect estimate is limited. The
true effect may be substantially different from
the estimate of the effect.
Very Low
We have very little conﬁdence in the effect
estimate. The true effect is likely to be
substantially different from the estimate of
effect
Table 2.Strength of Recommendation
Strength of
recommendation
For the patient
For the clinician
Strong
Most individuals in this situation would want the
recommended course of action and only a small
proportion would not.
Most individuals should receive the recommended
course of action. Formal decision aids are not
likely to be needed to help individuals make
decisions consistent with their values and
preferences.
Conditional
The majority of individuals in this situation would
want the suggested course of action, but many
would not.
Different choices will be appropriate for different
patients. Decision aids may be useful in helping
individuals in making decisions consistent with
their values and preferences. Clinicians should
expect to spend more time with patients when
working towards a decision.
698
Su et al
Gastroenterology Vol. 159, No. 2
AGA SECTION

[page 3]
manufacturers use different processes, which may affect the
actual content of the probiotic utilized, but this is not within
the scope of this guideline and therefore we provided the
granular data regarding each strain as speciﬁed in the
published reports. When the information was available, we
considered the strain speciﬁcity when evaluating outcomes.
In patients with Clostridioides difﬁcile infection, we
recommend the use of probiotics only in the context
of a clinical trial. No recommendation, knowledge gap,
The AGA makes no recommendations for the use of
probiotics in the treatment of C difﬁcile infection. Inci-
dence of C difﬁcile infection is rising and is responsible
for almost half a million infections in the United States
in 2011,13 with recurrence rates of up to 19.9%, and
leading
to
29,000
deaths.
Fecal
microbiota
trans-
plantation is highly effective in treating recurrent C
difﬁcile infection,14 but the data supporting the use of
probiotics in initial or recurrent C difﬁcile infection are
less convincing.
Table 3.Summary of recommendationsa
Recommendations
Strength of recommendation
Quality of evidence
1. In patients with C difﬁcile infection, we recommend the use of
probiotics only in the context of a clinical trial.
No recommendation
Knowledge gap
2. In adults and children on antibiotic treatment, we suggest the use
of S boulardii; or the 2-strain combination of L acidophilus
CL1285 and L casei LBC80R; or the 3-strain combination of L
acidophilus, L delbrueckii subsp bulgaricus, and B biﬁdum; or the
4-strain combination of L acidophilus, L delbrueckii subsp
bulgaricus, B biﬁdum, and S salivarius subsp thermophilus over
no or other probiotics for prevention of C difﬁcile infection.
Comment: Patients who place a high value on the
potential harms (particularly those with severe illnesses) or a
high value on avoiding the associated cost and a low
value on the small risk of C difﬁcile development (particularly
in the outpatient setting), would reasonably select no
probiotics.
Conditional
Low
3. In adults and children with Crohn’s disease, we recommend the
use of probiotics only in the context of a clinical trial.
No recommendation
Knowledge gap
4. In adults and children with ulcerative colitis, we recommend the
use of probiotics only in the context of a clinical trial.
No recommendation
Knowledge gap
5. In adults and children with pouchitis, we suggest the 8-strain
combination of L paracasei subsp paracasei, L plantarum,
L acidophilus, L delbrueckii subsp bulgaricus, B longum subsp
longum, B breve, B longum subsp infantis, and S salivarius subsp
thermophilus over no or other probiotics.
Comment: Patients for whom the feasibility and cost of using
this combination of bacterial strain is problematic may
reasonably select no probiotics.
Conditional
Very low
6. In symptomatic children and adults with irritable bowel syndrome,
we recommend the use of probiotics only in the context of a
clinical trial.
No recommendations
Knowledge gap
7. In children with acute infectious gastroenteritis, we suggest
against the use of probiotics.
Conditional
Moderate
8. In preterm (less than 37 weeks gestational age), low-birth-weight
infants, we suggest using a combination of Lactobacillus spp and
Biﬁdobacterium spp (L rhamnosus ATCC 53103 and B longum
subsp infantis; or L casei and B breve; or L rhamnosus, L
acidophilus, L casei, B longum subsp infantis, B biﬁdum, and B
longum subsp longum; or L acidophilus and B longum subsp
infantis; or L acidophilus and B biﬁdum; or L rhamnosus ATCC
53103 and B longum Reuter ATCC BAA-999; or L acidophilus, B
biﬁdum, B animalis subsp lactis, and B longum subsp longum), or
B animalis subsp lactis (including DSM 15954), or L reuteri (DSM
17938 or ATCC 55730), or L rhamnosus (ATCC 53103 or ATC
A07FA or LCR 35) for prevention of NEC over no and other
probiotics.
Conditional
Moderate/high
aPlease see the accompanying technical review for the supporting evidence.1
August 2020
AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on Probiotics and Gastrointestinal Disorders
699
AGA SECTION

[page 4]
The technical review identiﬁed 5 placebo-controlled
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating probiotics
as adjunct treatment with antibiotics, testing 4 different
probiotic formulations. The patient populations across
studies differed, including patients with an initial C difﬁcile
infection, recurrent infection, or both. Probiotics or placebo
was administered together with metronidazole or vanco-
mycin at low dose or high doses. Due to these variations in
the study design, as well as in clinical outcomes, data were
deemed too heterogeneous to be pooled in the analysis. All 5
published studies contained uncertain or high risk of bias
regarding blinding of outcome assessment and selective
reporting.
The probiotic formulations studied included Saccharo-
myces boulardii, Lactobacillus plantarum 299v, Lactobacillus
rhamnosus ATCC 53103, and the 4-strain combination of
Lactobacillus acidophilus ATCC 700396, Lactobacillus para-
casei subsp paracasei ATCC 335, Biﬁdobacterium animalis
subsp lactis ATCC SD5220 and B animalis subsp lactis ATCC
SD5219. The largest study, involving 134 patients, reported
that S boulardii may have a beneﬁcial effect on cessation
(relative risk [RR], 1.33; 95% conﬁdence interval [CI], 1.02–
1.74) and recurrence of diarrhea (RR, 0.59; 95% CI, 0.35–
0.98), but the quality of evidence was low. The smaller trials
with L plantarum 299v or the 4-strain combination sug-
gested that these probiotics also may have beneﬁcial effects
on diarrhea but the evidence was very uncertain, while the
administration of L rhamnosus ATCC 53103 resulted in
increased recurrence of C difﬁcile infection compared to
placebo (RR, 2.63; 95% CI, 0.35–19.85). The overall cer-
tainty of evidence across all critical outcomes for probiotics
used as adjunctive treatment for C difﬁcile infection was low.
Furthermore, the technical review identiﬁed a potential risk
of publication bias due to multiple registered trials that
were not linked to a published report. While currently
available data suggest that some probiotics might be bene-
ﬁcial in treatment of C difﬁcile, further studies with stan-
dardized study design and larger number of patients are
needed to deﬁne those probiotics, as well as to identify
which
patient
populations
may
beneﬁt
from
this
intervention.
In adults and children on antibiotic treatment, we
suggest
the
use of
S
boulardii;
or
the
2-strain
combination
of
L
acidophilus
CL1285
and
Lactobacillus
casei
LBC80R;
or
the
3-strain
combination
of
L
acidophilus,
Lactobacillus
delbrueckii subsp bulgaricus, and Biﬁdobacterium
biﬁdum; or the 4-strain combination of L acidophilus,
L
delbrueckii
subsp
bulgaricus,
B
biﬁdum,
and
Streptococcus salivarius subsp thermophilus over no
or
other
probiotics
for
prevention
of
C
difﬁcile
infection.
Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence.
Comment: Patients who place a high value on the
potential harms (particularly those with severe illnesses)
or a high value on avoiding the associated cost and a
low value on the small risk of C difﬁcile development
(particularly in the outpatient setting), would reasonably
select no probiotics.
The AGA suggests the use of certain strains and strain
combination of probiotics in the prevention of C difﬁcile
infection. Although there is a large body of literature
studying the role of probiotics in preventing antibiotic-
associated C difﬁcile infection, the studies are very hetero-
geneous. The technical review identiﬁed 39 studies that
were previously evaluated by Cochrane review published in
2017.15 A total of 9955 patients were included but the
populations studied were extremely varied, including pedi-
atric, adult, and elderly patients—utilizing a variety of
antibiotic regimens in both inpatient and outpatient set-
tings—who have very different risks for the development of
C difﬁcile infection. The Cochrane review found that pro-
biotics reduced the overall risk of C difﬁcile infection vs
placebo (RR, 0.40; 95% CI, 0.30–0.52); however, the bene-
ﬁcial effect was driven by the population of patients with
high risk of developing C difﬁcile infection, with no signiﬁ-
cant effects observed in patients with low or baseline risk.
The technical review did not identify any new RCTs
between the 2017 Cochrane review and November 2018
and thus assessed the certainty of evidence from these 39
trials.1 The overall certainty of the evidence was down-
graded from Moderate to Low due to unclear or high risk of
bias in most of the trials across all domains for all outcomes
assessed. Several studies were published as abstracts only
or referenced unpublished data. Publication bias was
considered, as a large number of registered trial protocols
on this topic were not associated with subsequent peer-
reviewed publications.
Subgroup analyses of individual probiotic strains or
strain combinations that may have an effect compared with
placebo found that the risk of C difﬁcile infection develop-
ment was reduced by S boulardii (RR, 0.41; 95% CI, 0.22–
0.79); the 2-species combination of L acidophilus CL1285
and L casei LBC80R (RR, 0.22; 95% CI, 0.11–0.42); the 3-
strain combination of L acidophilus, L delbrueckii subsp
bulgaricus, and B biﬁdum (RR, 0.35; 95% CI, 0.15–0.85); as
well as the 4-strain combination of L acidophilus, L del-
brueckii subsp bulgaricus, B biﬁdum, and S salivarius subsp
thermophilus (RR, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.11–0.67), with the overall
quality of the evidence rated as Low. It should be pointed
out that beneﬁcial effect of probiotics was seen mainly in
patients with very high risk of developing C difﬁcile infection
(>15% baseline risk) and that the analysis of most studies
had a wide CI that includes the potential for some beneﬁt, as
well as for some harm. Thus, patients who place a high value
on avoiding associated ﬁnancial cost or potential harms
(especially those immunocompromised patients) and who
have low risk of developing C difﬁcile infection (mainly
outpatients in the community) may choose not to use any
probiotics.
In adults and children with Crohn’s disease, the AGA
recommends use of probiotics only in the context of
a clinical trial. No recommendation, knowledge gap.
The AGA recommends use of probiotics on only in the
context of a clinical trial for adults and children with Crohn’s
700
Su et al
Gastroenterology Vol. 159, No. 2
AGA SECTION

[page 5]
disease. Alterations in the gut microbiome in patients with
Crohn’s disease are being explored increasingly, and interest
in microbiota-based therapies, such as probiotics and fecal
microbiota transplantation, is growing. However, studies of
probiotics for induction or maintenance of remission in
Crohn’s disease have been limited by small sample sizes,
heterogeneity in patient populations, heterogeneity in study
design, and differences in the probiotic formulations tested.
The technical review searched for studies of both in-
duction and maintenance of remission in Crohn’s disease in
adults and children. Only 1 study of 11 subjects was iden-
tiﬁed for induction of remission in either adults or children.
This study found no evidence of beneﬁt for L rhamnosus
ATCC 53103 compared to placebo for induction of remission
(odds ratio [OR], 0.80; 95% CI, 0.04–17.20), with CI that
were wide and thus did not exclude the potential for beneﬁt
or harm.
Eleven studies of probiotics for maintenance of remis-
sion in adults and children with Crohn’s disease were
identiﬁed. The identiﬁed studies were heterogeneous in
inclusion criteria, the probiotic studied, and study design.
The probiotic formulations studied included Escherichia coli
Nissle 1917; S boulardii; L rhamnosus ATCC 53103; Lacto-
bacillus johnsonii NCC 533; and an 8-strain probiotic com-
bination of L paracasei subsp paracasei, L plantarum, L
acidophilus, L delbrueckii subsp bulgaricus, Biﬁdobacterium
longum subsp longum, Biﬁdobacterium breve, Biﬁdobacte-
rium longum subsp infantis, and S salivarius subsp thermo-
philus.
In
addition,
the
studies
differed
on
whether
remission was induced by medical or surgical therapy, and
only 1 study enrolled children. Lastly, some of the studies
used mesalamine as the comparator, or allowed co-therapy
with mesalamine in the probiotic arm. There was no overall
evidence of beneﬁt from any of the probiotic therapies
studied for maintenance of remission.
The overall quality of the evidence was rated as low for
induction of remission and maintenance of remission. Given
the overall small study samples, as well as heterogeneity in
patient populations, probiotic strains studied, and study
design, it is unclear whether there is potential for speciﬁc
probiotic strains to be beneﬁcial for either induction or
maintenance of remission in Crohn’s disease. Further
studies are needed to deﬁne speciﬁc populations of patients
with Crohn’s disease who might beneﬁt from probiotics, as
well as the most effective probiotic strains.
In adults and children with ulcerative colitis, the AGA
recommends
the
use
of
probiotics
only
in
the
context
of
a
clinical
trial.
No
recommendation,
knowledge gap.
The AGA recommends the use of probiotics in adults and
children with ulcerative colitis only in the context of a
clinical trial. As with Crohn’s disease, interest in microbiota-
based therapies for ulcerative colitis is growing. However,
available evidence is limited because of heterogeneity in
study design, patient populations, and the speciﬁc probiotics
that have been studied.
The technical review identiﬁed 11 studies on the use of
probiotics for induction of remission in adults and children
with ulcerative colitis. The probiotic formulations under
evaluation included the 3-strain combination of B breve
Yakult, B biﬁdum Yakult, and L acidophilus; B longum Reuter
ATCC BAA-999; E coli Nissle 1917; Lactobacillus reuteri
ATCC 55730; and the 8-strain combination of L paracasei
subsp paracasei, L plantarum, L acidophilus, L delbrueckii
subsp bulgaricus, B longum subsp longum, B breve, B longum
subsp infantis, and S salivarius subsp thermophilus. The
comparators varied among studies, and in some studies
included mesalamine.
Four studies compared the 8-strain probiotic combina-
tion to mesalamine or balsalazide for induction of remission,
suggesting potential for beneﬁt but with very low certainty
of the evidence (RR, 1.72; 95% CI, 0.78–3.32). Two studies
examined the effectiveness of oral E coli Nissle 1917
compared to mesalamine for this indication, again with
uncertain beneﬁt (RR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.49–1.49). One of
these studies also allowed adjunctive treatment with ste-
roids and gentamicin, while the other allowed co-therapy
with topical prednisolone. One study of rectally adminis-
tered E coli Nissle 1917 did not show any clear evidence of
beneﬁt compared to placebo. Rectally administered L reuteri
ATCC 55730 was tested in children, with suggestion of an
increased clinical response rate compared to placebo (RR,
1.83; 95% CI, 1.14–2.92). Other probiotics were tested in
single studies only, with no demonstrated beneﬁt for in-
duction of remission.
The technical review identiﬁed 6 studies of probiotics
for maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis. Two
studies of E coli Nissle 1917 and 1 study of L rhamnosus
ATCC 53103 (RR, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.60–1.11) did not show
clear beneﬁt of the probiotic compared to mesalamine for
maintenance of remission. In addition, compared to placebo,
the 2-strain combination of L acidophilus LA-5 and B ani-
malis subsp lactis Bb12; the 2-strain combination of B breve
Yakult and L acidophilus; and the 3-strain combination of
Enterococcus faecalis T-111, Clostridium butyricum TO-A,
and Bacillus mesentericus TO-A did not show any evidence
of beneﬁt for this indication, although these formulations
were tested in single studies only.
The overall quality of evidence for probiotics for in-
duction or maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis
was rated as low. Available evidence is limited by small
sample sizes, differences in patient populations, variability
in study design, and heterogeneity in the probiotic formu-
lations used. The most extensively tested formulation was
the 8-strain combination of L paracasei subsp paracasei, L
plantarum, L acidophilus, L delbrueckii subsp bulgaricus, B
longum subsp longum, B breve, B longum subsp infantis, and
S salivarius subsp thermophilus for induction of remission,
although even here the available studies were limited by
potential for bias and pooled results did not show evidence
of beneﬁt. Further research is needed to identify speciﬁc
August 2020
AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on Probiotics and Gastrointestinal Disorders
701
AGA SECTION

[page 6]
patient populations that might beneﬁt most from treatment
with probiotics and to deﬁne the most effective probiotic
formulations.
In
adults
and
children
with
pouchitis,
the
AGA
suggests the use of the 8-strain combination of L
paracasei
subsp
paracasei,
L
plantarum,
L
acidophilus,
L
delbrueckii
subsp
bulgaricus,
B
longum subsp longum, B breve, B longum subsp
infantis, and S salivarius subsp thermophilus over no
or other probiotics.
Conditional recommendation,
very low
quality of
evidence.
Comment: Patients for whom the feasibility and cost of
using this combination of bacterial strain is problematic
may reasonably select no probiotics.
The AGA suggests the use of the 8-strain combination of
L paracasei subsp paracasei, L plantarum, L acidophilus, L
delbrueckii subsp bulgaricus, B longum subsp longum, B
breve, B longum subsp infantis, and S salivarius subsp ther-
mophilus over no or other probiotics in patients with pou-
chitis. Pouchitis is a frequent post-surgical complication
after total proctocolectomy and ileal pouch–anal anasto-
mosis for ulcerative colitis, and a role for the gut microbiota
has been suggested in its pathogenesis. The possibility of
microbiota-directed therapy for this condition has been
suggested.
The technical review identiﬁed 7 studies of probiotics
for treatment or prevention of pouchitis in adult patients
with an ileal pouch–anastomosis for management of ulcer-
ative colitis. The 8-strain probiotic formulation for mainte-
nance of remission in chronic pouchitis was tested in 2
studies including a total of 76 patients, with a potential
beneﬁt in the proportion of patients who maintained
remission at 12 months compared to placebo (RR, 20.24;
95% CI, 4.28–95.81, low certainty of evidence). Two addi-
tional studies suggested a beneﬁt of the same 8-strain
combination for prevention of an initial episode of acute
pouchitis, but with very low certainty of evidence (RR for no
episodes of pouchitis, 1.29; 95% CI, 1.03–1.61). Single trials
of L rhamnosus ATCC 53103, B longum Reuter ATCC BAA-
999, and C butyricum CBM 588 did not show clear evi-
dence of beneﬁt for treatment or prevention of pouchitis,
although samples sizes were extremely small in all available
studies.
The overall quality of evidence was rated as very low
due to risk of bias, small sample sizes, and heterogeneity in
the patient populations and interventions tested. The ma-
jority of evidence came from studies of the 8-strain pro-
biotic combination of L paracasei subsp paracasei, L
plantarum, L acidophilus, L delbrueckii subsp bulgaricus, B
longum subsp longum, B breve, B longum subsp infantis, and
S salivarius subsp thermophilus. Other probiotic formula-
tions need further testing for this indication. It also unclear
whether these results would apply to children or to patients
who underwent an ileal pouch–anal anastomosis for con-
ditions other than chronic ulcerative colitis, such as familial
adenomatous polyposis.
In symptomatic children and adults with irritable
bowel
syndrome,
we
recommend
the
use
of
probiotics only in the context of a clinical trial. No
recommendations, knowledge gap.
The AGA makes no recommendations for the use of
probiotics in children and adults with irritable bowel syn-
drome (IBS). While there are many studies examining this
question, they are marked by signiﬁcant heterogeneity in
study design, outcome, and probiotics used.
The technical review found a total of 76 RCTs that used
44 different probiotic strains or combinations of strains.1
For the majority of studies that reported a beneﬁt, the
data were derived from a single RCT. Only 2 formulations (S
boulardii and the 8-strain combination) had more than 1
RCT that measured the same outcome, allowing for com-
bined analysis. Three studies tested S boulardii in 232 adults
with IBS and while the studies used different outcome
measures, all reported an abdominal pain score that was not
different between those treated with S boulardii and those
treated with placebo. Two RCTs tested the 8-strain combi-
nation (L paracasei subsp paracasei, L plantarum, L aci-
dophilus, L delbrueckii subsp bulgaricus, B longum subsp
longum, B breve, B longum subsp infantis, and S salivarius
subsp thermophilus) in 73 adults with IBS and abdominal
pain and although this demonstrated a decrease in the
abdominal pain score using the visual analog scale (mean
decrease, 3.78; 95% CI, 4.93–2.62), the overall sample size
was small and there was unclear risk of selection, reporting,
and detection bias. In addition, the patients enrolled were of
variable IBS subtypes.
In the remainder of the studies, the majority of the single
RCTs using different probiotic and probiotic combinations
of variable duration reported some beneﬁt, but the sample
sizes were all relatively small and had signiﬁcant differences
in study subjects and designs. The overall quality of evi-
dence was very low. There was also signiﬁcant concern for
publication bias, as the Technical Review team found
numerous
registered
protocols
that
yielded
no
peer-
reviewed publications or results that were publicly avail-
able. Although there has been signiﬁcant interest and po-
tential for the use of probiotics in IBS, further studies are
needed to clarify this important question.
In children with acute infectious gastroenteritis, we
suggest against the use of probiotics.
Conditional recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence.
The AGA suggests against the use of probiotics in children
with acute infectious gastroenteritis in the United States and
Canada. The majority of the data supporting the use of pro-
biotics in children with acute infectious gastroenteritis were
from studies performed outside of United States and Canada,
while 2 high-quality studies performed in the United States
and Canada did not show any beneﬁt.
702
Su et al
Gastroenterology Vol. 159, No. 2
AGA SECTION

[page 7]
The technical review identiﬁed 89 studies, 58 were included
in a Cochrane Review published in 2010 and 31 additional
studies were published after 2010. Most of the studies that
showed a beneﬁt of probiotics were published in India, Italy,
Poland, Turkey, and Pakistan and had 1 or more concerns
regarding risk of bias.1 Of the 89 studies, 58 reported duration of
diarrhea as an outcome. Combining these 58 studies that utilized
various strains of probiotics, the mean duration of diarrhea was
reduced by 21.91 hours (95% CI, 16.17–27.64 hours), but the
level of evidence was low. The most commonly studied probiotic
was S boulardii, which was utilized in 21 RCTs. Only 9 studies
reported on the mean duration of diarrhea, which was reduced
by 28.9 hours (95% CI, 16.78–41.03 hours), but the level of
evidence was very low. The second most commonly used strain
was L rhamnosus ATCC 53103, which was evaluated in 19 RCTs.
Of these 19 RCTs, 14 studies reported mean duration of diarrhea
as an outcome, which was reduced by 23.13 hours (95% CI,
12.33–33.94 hours).
While some strains of bacteria improved diarrhea duration
in children, few of the studies were performed in North America
until 2 recent multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials conducted by the Pediatric Emergency Care
Applied Research Network and the Pediatric Emergency
Research Canada. These studies enrolled 943 and 827 children
from 10 and 6 emergency departments in the United States and
Canada, respectively. The US study used L rhamnosus ATCC
53103 and the Canadian study used a combination of L rham-
nosus R0011 and Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 for 5 days.
Neither showed any beneﬁt in the occurrence of moderate-to-
severe gastroenteritis between placebo and probiotics groups.
Two additional studies in the United States and Canada using
the same strains of bacteria conﬁrmed the lack of beneﬁt. Given
likely differences in host genetics, diet, sanitation, and endemic
enteropathogens between North America and the other global
regions, as well as different causes of acute infectious gastro-
enteritis in children, we do not feel that the studies conducted in
other regions can be generalized to the population served by the
AGA and thus suggest against the use of probiotics for acute
infectious gastroenteritis in children.
In preterm (less than 37 weeks gestational age), low-
birth-weight infants, we suggest using a combination
of Lactobacillus spp and Biﬁdobacterium spp (L
rhamnosus
ATCC
53103
and
B
longum
subsp
infantis; or L casei and B breve; or L rhamnosus, L
acidophilus, L casei, B longum subsp infantis, B
biﬁdum,
and
B
longum
subsp
longum;
or
L
acidophilus
and
B
longum
subsp
infantis;
or
L
acidophilus and B biﬁdum; or L rhamnosus ATCC
53103 and B longum Reuter ATCC BAA-999; or L
acidophilus, B biﬁdum, B animalis subsp lactis, and
B longum subsp longum), or B animalis subsp lactis
(including DSM 15954), or L reuteri (DSM 17938 or
ATCC 55730), or L rhamnosus (ATCC 53103 or ATC
A07FA or LCR 35) over no and other probiotics.
Conditional recommendation, moderate/high quality
of evidence.
The AGA suggests the use of certain probiotic strain or
strain combination for the prevention of NEC in preterm
infants less than 37 weeks gestational age and low birth
weight. Preterm birth is common, affecting 10% of new-
borns in the United States and 15 million pregnancies
worldwide each year. Premature infants have increased risk
of mortality and multiple morbidities, including NEC. NEC is
the most important gastrointestinal emergency among
preterm neonates, characterized by mucosal or even deeper
intestinal necrosis of the bowel with common long-term
sequelae, including short bowel syndrome and impaired
neurodevelopment. Microbiota differs in infants with NEC
compared to healthy infants providing a rationale for
microbiota-oriented treatments.
The technical review presented results from a recent
systematic review and network meta-analysis that assessed
the role of probiotics in the prevention of mortality and
morbidity
in
preterm
infants.16
In
total,
63
studies
comparing single- and multiple-strain probiotics to placebo
in patients with severe NEC were included and multiple
outcomes, such as all-cause mortality, severe NEC (stage II
or greater), culture-proven sepsis, and duration of hospi-
talization were assessed.
Combinations of Lactobacillus spp and Biﬁdobacterium
spp (L rhamnosus ATCC 53103 and B longum subsp infantis;
or L casei and B breve; or L rhamnosus, L acidophilus, L casei,
B longum subsp infantis, B biﬁdum, and B longum subsp
longum; or L acidophilus and B longum subsp infantis; or L
acidophilus and B biﬁdum; or L rhamnosus ATCC 53103 and
B longum Reuter ATCC BAA-999; or L acidophilus, B biﬁdum,
B animalis subsp lactis, and B longum subsp longum; or B
animalis subsp lactis [including DSM 15954], or L reuteri
[DSM 17938 or ATCC 55730], or L rhamnosus [ATCC 53103
or ATC A07FA or LCR 35]) reduced all-cause mortality
compared to placebo (OR, 0.56, 95% CI, 0.39–0.80), while
severe NEC was reduced by combinations of Lactobacillus
spp and Biﬁdobacterium spp (L rhamnosus ATCC 53103 and
B longum subsp infantis; or L casei and B breve; or L
rhamnosus, L acidophilus, L casei, B longum subsp infantis, B
biﬁdum, and B longum subsp longum; or L acidophilus and B
longum subsp infantis; or L acidophilus and B biﬁdum; or L
rhamnosus ATCC 53103 and B longum Reuter ATCC BAA-
999; or L acidophilus, B biﬁdum, B animalis subsp lactis,
and B longum subsp longum; OR, 0.35; 95% CI, 0.20–0.59), B
animalis subsp lactis (including strain DSM 15954; OR, 0.31;
95% CI, 0.13–0.74), L reuteri (DSM 17938 or ATCC 55730;
OR, 0.55; 95% CI, 0.34–0.91), or L rhamnosus (ATCC 53103
or ATC A07FA or LCR 35; OR, 0.44; 95% CI, 0.21–0.90), all
supported by moderate- or high-quality evidence.
There was low to very low quality of evidence to support
beneﬁcial effects of combinations of Lactobacillus spp, Biﬁ-
dobacterium spp, and Enterococcus spp (L acidophilus, B
longum subsp longum, and E faecalis; or L gasseri PTA-5845,
B longum subsp infantis PTA-5843, and E faecium PTA-
5844; or L acidophilus, B longum subsp longum, and E fae-
cium; or L acidophilus, B longum subsp infantis, and E fae-
calis (OR, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.16–0.49), combinations of
Biﬁdobacterium spp and S salivarius subsp thermophilus (B
longum subsp infantis, B biﬁdum, and S salivarius subsp
thermophilus; or B longum subsp infantis DSM 33361, B
animalis subsp lactis DSM 15954, and S salivarius subsp
August 2020
AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on Probiotics and Gastrointestinal Disorders
703
AGA SECTION

[page 8]
thermophilus TH-4) (OR, 0.38; 95% CI, 0.19–0.75) or a B
subtilis and E faecium (OR, 0.23; 95% CI, 0.08–0.63) in se-
vere NEC reduction compared to placebo.
Combinations of Lactobacillus spp, Biﬁdobacterium spp,
and S boulardii (L rhamnosus, L acidophilus, B longum subsp
longum, and S boulardii; or L acidophilus, B biﬁdum, and S
boulardii) reduced days to reach full enteral feeds (mean
difference [MD], –3.30; 95% CI, –5.91 to –0.69), supported
by moderate- or high-quality evidence. Similar effects,
although based on low or very low quality of evidence, were
shown with combinations of Lactobacillus spp and Biﬁdo-
bacterium spp (L casei and B breve; or L rhamnosus, L aci-
dophilus, L casei, B longum subsp infantis, B biﬁdum, and B
longum subsp longum; or L acidophilus and B biﬁdum; or L
acidophilus, B biﬁdum, B animalis subsp lactis, and B longum
subsp longum; MD, –2.15; 95% CI, –3.78 to –0.51), or with L
reuteri (DSM 17938 or ATCC 55730 (MD, –2.62; 95% CI,
–4.53 to –0.71). Finally, B animalis subsp lactis and L reuteri
(DSM 17938 or ATCC 55730) signiﬁcantly shortened hos-
pitalization based on moderate- or high-quality evidence
(MD, –13.00; 95% CI, –22.71 to –3.29 and MD, –7.89; 95%
CI, –11.60 to –4.17, respectively).
Discussion
The gut microbiome plays an important role in
gastrointestinal health and disease and probiotics repre-
sent a promising modality for therapeutic intervention. As
outlined in the accompanying technical review,1 the cur-
rent evidence suggests that the use of certain probiotic
strains or probiotic strain combinations may prevent C
difﬁcile infections for adults and children on antibiotic
treatment. However, the quality of evidence was low and
the reporting of potential harms was not always consis-
tent. Thus, for patients who place a high value on avoid-
ance of potential harms, particularly those with severe
illnesses or immunosuppression, it would be reasonable to
select not to use probiotics. While there was evidence for
probiotics in the prevention of C difﬁcile, the technical
review found signiﬁcant knowledge gap in the use of
probiotics in treatment of C difﬁcile and recommend this
as an area for further study. Similar knowledge gaps exist
in the use of probiotics in irritable bowel syndrome and
inﬂammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease and ulcera-
tive colitis). In the subset of patients with pouchitis, cur-
rent evidence supports the use of the 8-strain combination
(L paracasei subsp paracasei, L plantarum, L acidophilus, L
delbrueckii subsp bulgaricus, B longum subsp longum, B
breve, B longum subsp infantis, and S salivarius subsp
thermophilus) if feasibility of obtaining the combination is
not a barrier. In preterm infants less than 37 weeks
gestational age, the probiotic strains B animalis subsp
lactis or L reuteri (DSM 17938 or ATCC 55730) or L
rhamnosus (ATCC 53103 or ATC A07FA or LCR 35) or
combination of Lactobacillus spp and Biﬁdobacterium spp
(L rhamnosus ATCC 53103 and B longum subsp infantis; or
L casei and B breve; or L rhamnosus, L acidophilus, L casei,
B longum subsp infantis, B biﬁdum, and B longum subsp
longum; or L acidophilus and B longum subsp infantis; or L
acidophilus and B biﬁdum; or L rhamnosus ATCC 53103
and B longum Reuter ATCC BAA-999; or L acidophilus, B
biﬁdum, B animalis subsp lactis, and B longum subsp lon-
gum) may prevent the development of NEC. For children
with acute gastroenteritis in North America, however, the
current evidence does not support the use of probiotics.
While other society guidelines17–19 have previously rec-
ommended the use of probiotics in this population, these
guidelines were developed prior to the publication of two
large multi-center studies from North America, which
became available after their recommendations were made.
This is an area that will require further study and rec-
ommendations evolve as more direct high-quality data
become available.
We identiﬁed that signiﬁcant knowledge gaps exist in
this very promising and important area of research due to
the signiﬁcant heterogeneity between studies and vari-
ability in the probiotic strains studied. The lack of
consistent harms reporting makes it difﬁcult to assess true
harms. The lack of product manufacturing details pro-
hibits true comparisons and decreases the feasibility of
obtaining certain products by patients. Future high-quality
studies are urgently needed that address these pitfalls.
These guidelines will undergo a review and consideration
for an update within 3–5 years or earlier if practice-
changing evidence becomes available.
References
1. Preidis GA, Weizman AV, Kashyap PC, et al. AGA
Technical Review on the Role of Probiotics in the Man-
agement of Gastrointestinal Disorders. Gastroenterology
2020;159:724–754.
2. Sanders ME, Merenstein DJ, Reid G, et al. Probiotics and
prebiotics in intestinal health and disease: from biology
to the clinic. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;
16:605–616.
3. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations
(FAO)/World Health Organization (WHO). Health and
Nutritional Properties of Probiotics in Food including
Powder Milk with Live Lactic Acid Bacteria. Report of a
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Evaluation of
Health and Nutritional Properties of Probiotics in Food
Including Powder Milk with Live Lactic Acid Bacteria;
Cordoba, Argentina; October 1–5, 2001.
4. Sniffen JC, McFarland LV, Evans CT, et al. Choosing an
appropriate
probiotic
product
for
your
patient:
An
evidence-based practical guide. PLoS One 2018;13:
e0209205.
5. Caselli M, Cassol F, Calo G, et al. Actual concept of
"probiotics": is it more functional to science or business?
World J Gastroenterol 2013;19:1527–1540.
6. de Simone C. The unregulated probiotic market. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;17:809–817.
7. Suez J, Zmora N, Segal E, et al. The pros, cons, and
many
unknowns
of
probiotics.
Nat
Med
2019;25:
716–729.
704
Su et al
Gastroenterology Vol. 159, No. 2
AGA SECTION

[page 9]
8. Bindels LB, Delzenne NM, Cani PD, et al. Towards a
more comprehensive concept for prebiotics. Nat Rev
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;12:303–310.
9. Parker EA, Roy T, D’Adamo CR, et al. Probiotics and
gastrointestinalconditions:anoverviewofevidencefromthe
Cochrane Collaboration. Nutrition 2018;45:125–134 e11.
10. Clarke TC, Black LI, Stussman BJ, et al. Trends in the
use of complementary health approaches among adults:
United States, 2002–2012. Natl Health Stat Report 2015
Feb 10;(79):1–16.
11. Sultan S, Falck-Ytter Y, Inadomi JM. The AGA Institute
process for developing clinical practice guidelines part
one: grading the evidence. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
2013;11:329–332.
12. Graham R, Mancher M, Dianne W, et al. Clinical Practice
Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press, 2011.
13. Lessa FC, Mu Y, Bamberg WM, et al. Burden of Clos-
tridium difﬁcile infection in the United States. N Engl J
Med 2015;372:825–834.
14. Vaughn BP, Rank KM, Khoruts A. Fecal microbiota
transplantation: current status in treatment of GI and liver
disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;17:353–361.
15. Goldenberg JZ, Yap C, Lytvyn L, et al. Probiotics for the
prevention of Clostridium difﬁcile-associated diarrhea in
adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;
12:CD006095.
16. Morgan RL, Preidis GA, Kashyap PC, et al. Probiotics
reduce mortality and morbidity in preterm, low-birth-
weight infants: a systematic review and network meta-
analysis of randomized trials. Gastroenterology 2020;
159:467–480.
17. Guarino A, Ashkenazi S, Gendrel D, et al. European So-
ciety for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
Nutrition/European Society for Pediatric Infectious Dis-
eases evidence-based guidelines for the management of
acute gastroenteritis in children in Europe: update 2014.
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2014;59:132–152.
18. Szajewska H, Guarino A, Hojsak I, et al. Use of probiotics
for management of acute gastroenteritis: a position
paper by the ESPGHAN Working Group for Probiotics
and Prebiotics. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2014;
58:531–539.
19. Shane AL, Mody RK, Crump JA, et al. 2017 Infectious
Diseases Society of America Clinical Practice Guidelines
for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diar-
rhea. Clin Infect Dis 2017;65:1963–1973.
Correspondence
Address correspondence to: Chair, The AGA Clinical Guidelines Committee,
American Gastroenterological Association, National Ofﬁce, 4930 Del Ray
Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland 20814. e-mail: clinicalpractice@gastro.org. fax:
301-654-5920.
Acknowledgments
The Clinical Guidelines Committee included: Shahnaz Sultan, MD, MHSc,
AGAF, Chair; Karen Chachu, MD, PhD; Lukejohn Day, MD, AGAF; Benjamin
Lebwohl, MD, AGAF; Thiruvengadam Muniraj, MD, PhD, MRCP; Amit Patel,
MD; Anne F. Peery, MD; Raj Shah, MD; Harminder Singh, MD; Siddharth
Singh, MD; Stuart J. Spechler, MD, AGAF; Grace L. Su, MD, AGAF; Aaron P.
Thrift, BSc, PhD; Jennifer M. Weiss, MD, MS, AGAF; and Adam V. Weizman,
MD.
The Guideline Panel included: Grace L. Su (Chair): Division of Gastroenterology
and
Hepatology,
University
of
Michigan,
Ann
Arbor,
Michigan
and
Gastroenterology Section, Veterans Administration Ann Arbor Healthcare
System,
Ann
Arbor,
Michigan;
Cynthia
W.
Ko
(Member):
Division
of
Gastroenterology, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA;
Premysl Bercik (Member): Division of Gastroenterology, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
The
Technical
Review
Panel
included:
Rebecca
L.
Morgan
(GRADE
Methodologist): Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and
Impact, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada; Adam V. Weizman
(Methodologist Trainee): Division of Gastroenterology, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Purna Kashyap (Content Expert): Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo
Clinic,
Rochester,
Minnesota;
Geoffrey
A.
Preidis
(Content
Expert):
Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
Conﬂicts of interest
These authors disclose the following: Premysl Bercik received ﬁnancial
support/remuneration from Nestex, Allergan Canada, IM HealthScience, and
LUPIN Pharma Canada. Adam V. Weizman received ﬁnancial support/
renumeration from AbbVie, Janssen Pharmaceutica, Takeda Pharmaceutical
Company, and Ferring Pharmaceuticals. The remaining authors disclose no
conﬂicts. All members were required to complete disclosure statement.
These
statements
are
maintained
at
the
American
Gastroenterological
Association Institute headquarters in Bethesda, Maryland and pertinent
disclosures are published with the report.
August 2020
AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on Probiotics and Gastrointestinal Disorders
705
AGA SECTION