

[page 1]
AREDS/AREDS2 Clinical Trials
Age-Related Eye Disease Studies (AREDS/AREDS2):
major findings
The NEI conducted the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) and the follow-on AREDS2
to study cataract and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Study researchers tested
whether taking nutritional supplements could prevent or slow these diseases. The
formulations tested in the trials are now sold as the AREDS and the AREDS2 formulas.
Major AREDS/AREDS2 findings:
1. Taking AREDS or AREDS2 supplements reduces the risk of progression from
intermediate to advanced AMD by about 25 percent
2. AREDS and AREDS2 supplements do not prevent AMD onset
3. AREDS and AREDS2 supplements do not have an effect on cataract
4. Omega-3 fatty acid supplements do not have an effect on cataract or AMD
5. Current and former smokers should take the AREDS2 formula and avoid the
AREDS formula with beta-carotene, which increases lung cancer risk
Commercially available formulas based on AREDS/AREDS2
NUTRIENT
AREDS FORMULA*
AREDS2 FORMULA
VITAMIN C
500 mg
500 mg
VITAMIN E
400 IU
400 IU
BETA-CAROTENE
15 mg
-
COPPER (CUPRIC OXIDE)**
2 mg
2 mg
LUTEIN
-
10 mg
ZEAXANTHIN
-
2 mg
ZINC
80 mg
80 mg

[page 2]
*Not recommended for current or former smokers
**Added to avoid zinc-related copper deficiency
mg = milligrams
IU = international units
Age-Related Eye Disease
AMD and cataract are leading causes of visual impairment and blindness in the United
States. Risk dramatically increases after age 65.
AMD is a progressive disease of the light-sensing tissue at the back of the eye called
the retina. In later stages, AMD can lead to the loss of central vision and blindness.
.
Cataract is a clouding of the lens of the eye, which causes blurry vision and can lead to
blindness. The condition is common during aging and is usually treated with surgery to
replace the lens. 
.
Basis for AREDS/AREDS2
NEI sponsored AREDS/AREDS2 based on laboratory experiments, epidemiologic studies,
and clinical data that suggested antioxidants and zinc might reduce AMD and cataract risk,
or slow progression of these diseases.
AREDS/AREDS2 were designed to
assess the clinical course, prognosis, and risk factors of AMD and cataract
evaluate the effects of nutrients, including high-dose antioxidants, omega-3 fatty acids,
and zinc, on the progression of AMD, cataract, and related vision loss
AREDS design
AREDS included 4,757 participants, ages 55-80 years, with cataract, AMD, or both. AMD
results are based on 3,640 participants who had early or worse AMD. Cataract results are
based on 4,629 of the participants with cataract in one or both eyes.
AREDS included participants with AMD ranging from none in either eye to advanced AMD in
one eye but good vision (at least 20/30) in the other eye. The participants were enrolled at 11
clinics nationwide and their clinical progression was followed for 5 years. Fifty-six percent
Learn more about the AREDS/AREDS2 supplements
 
Learn more about AMD
 (https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-conditions-and-diseases/age-related-
macular-degeneration)
Learn more about cataract
 (https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-conditions-and-diseases/cataracts)

[page 3]
were female. The median age was 69 years. Enrollment began in November 1992 and ended
in January 1998.
Stages of age-related macular degeneration
CATEGORY
DESCRIPTION
CATEGORY 1 - NO
AMD
A few small or no drusen
CATEGORY 2 -
EARLY STAGE AMD
Many small drusen or a few medium-sized drusen in one or
both eyes
CATEGORY 3 -
INTERMEDIATE AMD
Many medium-sized drusen or one or more large drusen in one
or both eyes
CATEGORY 4 -
ADVANCED AMD
In one eye only, either a breakdown of light-sensitive cells and
supporting tissue in the central retinal area (advanced dry
form) or abnormal and fragile blood vessels under the retina
(wet form)
AREDS randomization
The participants in each category were randomly
selected to receive daily oral tablets for one of
four treatments:
1. antioxidant formulation (see below) and zinc
(80mg) + copper (2mg)
2. zinc (80mg) + copper (2mg)
3. antioxidant formulation
4. a placebo (a pill with no active ingredients)
The antioxidant formulation
contained a combination of the
following nutrients:
1. vitamin C (500 mg)
2. vitamin E (400 IU)
3. beta-carotene (15 mg)
 
AREDS results
AREDS: Risk reduction for each formulation, compared to placebo
RESULT
ANTIOXIDANTS, ZINC +
COPPER (AREDS
FORMULA)
ZINC +
COPPER
ANTIOXIDANTS

[page 4]
RESULT
ANTIOXIDANTS, ZINC +
COPPER (AREDS
FORMULA)
ZINC +
COPPER
ANTIOXIDANTS
PROGRESSION FROM
INTERMEDIATE TO
ADVANCED AMD
25%
21%
17%
VISION LOSS
19%
11%
10%
CATARACT SURGERY
-
-
-
AREDS scientists found that people at high risk for developing advanced AMD—those with
intermediate AMD, and those with advanced AMD in one eye only—reduced their risk of
developing advanced by about 25 percent when treated with the combination of antioxidants
and zinc + copper (final AREDS formula). The AREDS formula also reduced the risk of central
vision loss by 19% in the same group. None of the formulations decreased cataract risk.
AREDS follow-up
AREDS investigators followed participants for an additional five years. Ten years after
enrollment, about 70% of participants were taking the antioxidants plus zinc + copper
formulation (AREDS formula). The investigators found that participants who had been
assigned to antioxidants plus zinc + copper formulation in the trial were 25-30% less likely
to develop advanced AMD than those who had originally been assigned to placebo. Among
participants at the highest risk for AMD, 34% who had taken the antioxidants plus zinc +
copper (AREDS formula) in the trial progressed to advanced AMD, compared to 44% who
had taken the placebo.
Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 design
NEI launched AREDS2 in 2006 to test if adding omega-3 fatty acids or lutein + zeaxanthin
would make the AREDS formula more effective. Omega-3 fatty acids are produced by plants,
including algae, and are present in oily fish such as salmon. Lutein and zeaxanthin are
carotenoids, a class of plant-derived vitamins that includes beta-carotene. Additionally,
AREDS2 investigators tested the effect of eliminating beta-carotene, which in some studies
increased lung cancer risk in smokers. They also tested lowering the zinc dose.
AREDS2 investigators enrolled 4,203 participants, ages 50-85, at one of 82 clinical sites
across the country. AREDS2 included only people with intermediate AMD in both eyes or
intermediate AMD in one eye and advanced AMD in the other eye. AREDS2 excluded people
without AMD or with early AMD because AREDS data showed no benefit for these
individuals. AREDS2 investigators excluded current smokers from receiving the formulation
containing beta-carotene.

[page 5]
AREDS2 randomization
Primary randomization: AREDS2
investigators randomly assigned
participants to one of the following groups:
1. Omega-3 fatty acids (350 mg
docosahexanoic acid + 650 mg
eicosapentanoic acid)
2. Lutein (10 mg) + zeaxanthin (2 mg)
3. Lutein + zeaxanthin and omega-3 fatty
acids
4. Placebo
Secondary randomization: Additionally,
3549 AREDS2 participants were
randomized to take one of the following:
1. AREDS formula
2. AREDS formula minus beta-
carotene
3. AREDS formula with low (25 mg)
zinc
4. AREDS formula minus beta-
carotene and with low (25 mg) zinc
The remaining participants were not
randomized and generally took the
AREDS formula.
AREDS2 results
In the AREDS2 trial, adding omega-3 fatty acids or lutein + zeaxanthin to the AREDS formula
had no additional overall effect on the risk of advanced AMD. However, AREDS2 participants
who took antioxidants minus beta-carotene but with lutein + zeaxanthin (AREDS2 formula)
had an incremental increase in benefit, compared to those who took the AREDS formula.
AREDS2 participants who were former smokers who took a formulation with beta-carotene
had a higher incidence of lung cancer. The investigators found no significant changes in the
effectiveness of the formulation when they removed beta-carotene or reduced the zinc dose.
Adding omega-3 fatty acids or lutein + zeaxanthin to antioxidants plus zinc (AREDS formula),
had no overall effect on the need for cataract surgery.
Last updated: October 22, 2025
Was this page helpful?
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
AREDS and AREDS2 Information
Age-Related Eye Disease Studies

[page 6]
Information about AMD
Information about Cataracts
AREDS/AREDS2 Nutritional Supplements
 
AREDS/AREDS2 Frequently Asked Questions
 
AREDS/AREDS2 News
 
About Age-Related Macular Degeneration
 
AMD News
 
About Cataracts
 
Cataract News