

[page 1]
Drugs & Supplements
Amylase/lipase/pancrelipase/protease
(oral route)
Request appointment
Register/Log in
On this page
Description
Before using
Proper use
Precautions
Side effects
Description
Pancrelipase is used to treat patients who cannot digest food
normally because their pancreas does not make enough enzymes
(exocrine pancreatic insufficiency). Pancrelipase tablet is used in
combination with a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) in patients who
have long-term swelling of the pancreas (chronic pancreatitis) or
who have had some or all of their pancreas removed
(pancreatectomy).
Pancrelipase contains a mixture of digestive enzymes (eg, lipases,
proteases, and amylases) needed for the digestion of proteins,
starches, and fats.
This medicine is available only with your doctor's prescription.

[page 2]
Back to top
Before Using
In deciding to use a medicine, the risks of taking the medicine must
be weighed against the good it will do. This is a decision you and
your doctor will make. For this medicine, the following should be
considered:
Allergies
Tell your doctor if you have ever had any unusual or allergic
reaction to this medicine or any other medicines. Also tell your
health care professional if you have any other types of allergies,
such as to foods, dyes, preservatives, or animals. For non-
prescription products, read the label or package ingredients
carefully.
Pediatric
Appropriate studies performed to date have not demonstrated
pediatric-specific problems that would limit the usefulness of
pancrelipase delayed-release capsules in children. Safety and
efficacy have been established.
Appropriate studies have not been performed on the relationship
of age to the effects of pancrelipase tablets in the pediatric
population. This medicine may cause unwanted effects (eg, weight
gain, malnutrition) in children. Safety and efficacy have not been
established.

[page 3]
Geriatric
Appropriate studies performed to date have not demonstrated
geriatric-specific problems that would limit the usefulness of
pancrelipase in the elderly.
Drug Interactions
Although certain medicines should not be used together at all, in
other cases two different medicines may be used together even if
an interaction might occur. In these cases, your doctor may want to
change the dose, or other precautions may be necessary. Tell your
healthcare professional if you are taking any other prescription or
nonprescription (over-the-counter [OTC]) medicine.
Other Interactions
Certain medicines should not be used at or around the time of
eating food or eating certain types of food since interactions may
occur. Using alcohol or tobacco with certain medicines may also
cause interactions to occur. Discuss with your healthcare
professional the use of your medicine with food, alcohol, or
tobacco.
Other Medical Problems
The presence of other medical problems may affect the use of this
medicine. Make sure you tell your doctor if you have any other
medical problems, especially:
Allergy to pork products or
Fibrosing colonopathy (scarring or thickening of your bowel
wall), history of or
Gout or

[page 4]
Hyperuricemia (high uric acid levels in the blood) or
Intestinal blockage, history of or
Kidney disease or
Lactose intolerant—Use with caution. May make these
conditions worse.
Back to top
Proper Use
Take this medicine exactly as directed by your doctor. Do not take
more of it, do not take it more often, and do not take it for a longer
time than your doctor ordered. To do so may increase the chance
of side effects.
This medicine should come with a Medication Guide and patient
instructions. Read and follow these instructions carefully. Ask your
doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions.
Take this medicine with food.
Swallow the capsule or tablet whole with enough fluid (eg, water or
juice) to prevent irritation of the mouth. Do not crush or chew it.
For patients taking the tablets:
Viokace™ tablet is used in combination with certain medicines
for stomach ulcer called proton pump inhibitors (eg,
esomeprazole, lansoprazole, omeprazole, Nexium®, Prevacid®,
Prilosec®).
Swallow the tablets quickly with some liquid, without chewing,
to avoid mouth irritation.

[page 5]
For patients taking the delayed-release capsules:
Swallow the capsule whole.
Do not crush, break, or chew before swallowing. Do not hold
the capsule in your mouth.
When given to adults or children who can not swallow the
capsule, the capsule may be opened and sprinkled onto a small
amount (about 10 mL or less) of soft acidic food (eg,
applesauce, bananas, or plain Greek yogurt). Mix the contents
evenly. Do not crush the capsule contents while mixing. This
mixture must be swallowed immediately and followed with a
glass of water or juice. This will ensure complete swallowing of
the contents of the capsule and avoid mouth irritation.
When given to infants, the contents of the capsule may be put
directly into the infant's mouth or mixed with a small amount
(about 10 mL or less) of soft acidic food (eg, applesauce,
pureed bananas, or pears), followed by 4 ounces (120 mL) of
formula or breastfeeding. Do not mix the contents of the
capsule directly into a bottle of breast milk or formula. This
could reduce the effect of the medicine.
Pertzye® capsules may also be given through a gastrostomy
tube with a diameter of 14 French or larger.
Mix the contents of the capsule with soft food (eg,
applesauce).
Remove the plunger and carefully spoon the mixture into
the syringe. Replace the plunger partially back.
Connect the syringe into the tube feeding port and inject
the medicine for 10 to 12 seconds.
Flush the tube with 10 mL of water to rinse all of the
medicine into the stomach.
Throw away any unused portions of the mixture. Do not save
for later use.

[page 6]
Do not change the brands or dosage forms of pancrelipase without
first checking with your doctor. Different products may not work in
the same way. If you refill your medicine and it looks different,
check with your pharmacist.
Dosing
The dose of this medicine will be different for different patients.
Follow your doctor's orders or the directions on the label. The
following information includes only the average doses of this
medicine. If your dose is different, do not change it unless your
doctor tells you to do so.
The amount of medicine that you take depends on the strength of
the medicine. Also, the number of doses you take each day, the
time allowed between doses, and the length of time you take the
medicine depend on the medical problem for which you are using
the medicine.
For the treatment patients who cannot digest food normally:
For oral dosage form (Creon® and Zenpep® delayed-
release capsules):
Adults and children 4 years of age and older—500
lipase units per kilograms (kg) per meal. Your doctor
may adjust your dose as needed and tolerated.
Children 12 months to younger than 4 years of age—
1000 lipase units per kg per meal. Your doctor may
adjust your dose as needed and tolerated.
Children from birth to 12 months of age—3000 lipase
units per 120 milliliters (mL) of formula or per
breastfeeding.
For oral dosage form (Pancreaze® delayed-release
capsules):

[page 7]
Adults and children 4 years of age and older—500
lipase units per kilograms (kg) per meal. Your doctor
may adjust your dose as needed and tolerated.
Children 12 months to younger than 4 years of age—
1000 lipase units per kg per meal. Your doctor may
adjust your dose as needed and tolerated.
Children from birth to 12 months of age—2600 lipase
units per 120 milliliters (mL) of formula or per
breastfeeding.
For oral dosage form (Pertzye® delayed-release capsules):
Adults and children 4 years of age and older—500
lipase units per kilograms (kg) per meal. Your doctor
may adjust your dose as needed and tolerated.
Children 12 months to younger than 4 years of age—
1000 lipase units per kg per meal. Your doctor may
adjust your dose as needed and tolerated.
Children from birth to 12 months of age—4000 lipase
units per 120 milliliters (mL) of formula or per
breastfeeding.
For oral dosage form (tablets):
Adults—At first, 500 lipase units per kilograms (kg) per
meal. Your doctor may adjust your dose as needed and
tolerated.
Children—Use and dose must be determined by your
doctor.
Missed Dose
If you miss a dose of this medicine, skip the missed dose and go
back to your regular dosing schedule. Do not double doses.

[page 8]
Storage
Keep out of the reach of children.
Do not keep outdated medicine or medicine no longer needed.
Ask your healthcare professional how you should dispose of any
medicine you do not use.
Store the medicine in a closed container at room temperature,
away from heat, moisture, and direct light. Keep from freezing.
You may store repacked Zenpep® for up to 6 months.
Throw away unused Pertzye® mixture.
Do not eat or throw away the drying agent (desiccant) in your
medicine bottle. The drying agent will protect your medicine from
moisture.
Back to top
Precautions
It is very important that your doctor check your or your child's
progress at regular visits to make sure this medicine is working
properly. Blood and urine tests may be needed to check for
unwanted effects.
This medicine may cause a serious bowel disorder called fibrosing
colonopathy, especially if taken at a high dose for a long time in
children with cystic fibrosis. Check with your doctor right away if

[page 9]
you have bloating, constipation, diarrhea, nausea, stomach pain, or
vomiting.
This medicine may increase the uric acid levels in the blood
(hyperuricemia). Check with your doctor right away if you have
joint pain, stiffness, or swelling, lower back, side, or stomach pain,
or swelling of the feet or lower legs.
This medicine is made from the pancreas of pigs. Some pigs organs
have transmitted certain viruses to people who have received
them, although the risk is low. All are tested for viruses to keep the
transmission risk low. Talk with your doctor if you have concerns
about this risk.
This medicine may cause serious allergic reactions, including
anaphylaxis and asthma, which can be life-threatening and require
immediate medical attention. Tell your doctor right away if you
have a rash, itching, hoarseness, or trouble breathing or swallowing
after using this medicine.
Back to top
Side Effects
Along with its needed effects, a medicine may cause some
unwanted effects. Although not all of these side effects may occur,
if they do occur they may need medical attention.
Check with your doctor immediately if any of the following side
effects occur:

[page 10]
More common
Anxiety
Blurred vision
Chills
Cold sweats
Coma
Confusion
Cool, pale skin
Depression
Dizziness
Dry mouth
Fast heartbeat
Increased hunger
Increased thirst
Increased urination
Nausea
Nervousness
Nightmares
Seizures
Shakiness
Slurred speech
Stomach pain
Sweating
Trouble breathing
Unexplained weight loss
Unusual tiredness or weakness
Vomiting
Less common
Bloating or swelling of the face, arms, hands, lower legs, or feet
Cold flu-like symptoms

[page 11]
Cough or hoarseness
Fever
Indigestion
Pale skin
Rapid weight gain
Stomach bloating
Tingling of the hands or feet
Unusual bleeding or bruising
Incidence not known
Chest tightness
Constipation
Diarrhea
Difficulty swallowing
Excess air or gas in the stomach or intestines
Full feeling
Hives, itching, skin rash
Inflammation of the mouth
Passing gas
Puffiness or swelling of the eyelids or around the eyes, face,
lips, or tongue
Some side effects may occur that usually do not need medical
attention. These side effects may go away during treatment as your
body adjusts to the medicine. Also, your health care professional
may be able to tell you about ways to prevent or reduce some of
these side effects. Check with your health care professional if any
of the following side effects continue or are bothersome or if you
have any questions about them:
More common

[page 12]
Acid or sour stomach
Belching
Burning or itching around the anus
Headache
Heartburn
Incidence not known
Difficulty in moving
Joint pain or swelling
Muscle aches, cramps, pains, or stiffness
Other side effects not listed may also occur in some patients. If you
notice any other effects, check with your healthcare professional.
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may
report side effects to the FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088.
Back to top
Drug information provided by: Merative, Micromedex®
Portions of this document last updated: Feb. 01, 2026
Copyright: © Merative US L.P. 1973, 2026. All rights reserved. Information is for
End User's use only and may not be sold, redistributed or otherwise used for
commercial purposes.
Products & Services
The Mayo Clinic Diet
Drugs & Supplements

[page 13]
Find a doctor
Explore careers
Sign up for free e-
newsletters
About Mayo Clinic 
About this Site
Contact Us
Locations
Health Information Policy
Medicare Accountable Care Organization (ACO)
Media Requests
News Network
Price Transparency
Researchers 
Research Faculty
Laboratories
International Patients 
Appointments
Financial Services
Representative Offices
Charitable Care & Financial
Assistance 
Community Health Needs Assessment
Financial Assistance Documents – Arizona
Financial Assistance Documents – Florida
Financial Assistance Documents – Minnesota
Follow Mayo Clinic
Get the Mayo Clinic app
Amylase/lipase/pancrelipase/protease (oral route) - Side effects & dosage
DRG-20065293

[page 14]
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Digital Accessibility Statement
Advertising & Sponsorship Policy
Site Map
© 1998-2026 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education
and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.
Language:
English