

[page 4]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
of 1147 participants. The RR of adverse eﬀects in the antibiotic group was 1.8, 95% CI 1.01 to 3.21, (random-eﬀects). Adult participants had
a significantly greater risk of adverse eﬀects with antibiotics than with placebo (RR 2.62, 95% CI 1.32 to 5.18) (random-eﬀects) while there
was no greater risk in children (RR 0.91, 95% CI 0.51 to 1.63).
The pooled RR for persisting acute purulent rhinitis with antibiotics compared to placebo was 0.73 (95% CI 0.47 to 1.13) (random-eﬀects),
based on four studies with 723 participants. There was an increase in adverse eﬀects in the studies of antibiotics for acute purulent rhinitis
(RR 1.46, 95% CI 1.10 to 1.94).
Authors' conclusions
There is no evidence of benefit from antibiotics for the common cold or for persisting acute purulent rhinitis in children or adults. There is
evidence that antibiotics cause significant adverse eﬀects in adults when given for the common cold and in all ages when given for acute
purulent rhinitis. Routine use of antibiotics for these conditions is not recommended.
P L A I N   L A N G U A G E   S U M M A R Y
Antibiotics for the common cold, an infection of the upper respiratory tract
Most people around the world will have one or more common cold episodes every year. Except in low-income countries, the common cold
is one of the most cited reasons for people to use antibiotics, even more so if the mucus from their nose is coloured (acute purulent rhinitis).
However, common colds are caused by viruses, which do not respond to antibiotics, and antibiotics can cause side eﬀects, especially
diarrhoea. Overuse of antibiotics leads to bacteria becoming resistant to antibiotics.
To find out whether antibiotics work for the common cold we identified studies that compared one group of people taking an antibiotic
with another group of people taking a medication that looked similar but contained no antibiotic (a placebo). We found six studies of the
common cold, with 1147 participants and five studies of acute purulent rhinitis, with 791 participants. Many of the studies had flaws which
might have biased the results, especially because many of the participants probably had chest or sinus infections that the researchers did
not know about.
Results suggest that antibiotics do not work for either the common cold or for acute purulent rhinitis and many people are aﬀected by
antibiotic side eﬀects.
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2

[page 5]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
B A C K G R O U N D
The International Classification of Health Problems in Primary
Care (ICHPPC) (Spector 1995) defines an acute upper respiratory
tract infection (URTI), the common cold, as an illness with
evidence of acute inflammation of the nasal or pharyngeal
mucosa and the absence of other specifically defined respiratory
conditions, for example streptococcal tonsillitis, laryngitis,
bronchitis, pneumonia, asthma and hay fever (ICHPPC 1986). A
common cold is commonly regarded as a self limiting viral illness
that is experienced annually by the majority of the population. A
practical definition is an acute illness with some of the following
symptoms: rhinitis (not hay fever or allergic rhinitis), sore throat
(not streptococcal pharyngitis), with or without fever, cough and/or
productive sputum/purulent sputum.
There is evidence of high usage of antibiotics for the common
cold (viral URTI) in spite of doubts about the eﬀicacy of such
therapy (McGregor 1995; Spector 1995). Although it is known that
viruses are the causative agent, many patients presenting to their
general practitioners receive antibiotics. In one study, URTI was
the most common reason for new consultations in general practice
and the second most common reason for the prescribing of an
antibiotic (McAvoy 1994). In a New Zealand study, computerised
records of 100,222 consultations from 17 General Practices were
examined over one year (McGregor 1995). Seventy-eight per cent of
patients with an URTI received antibiotics. About one-third of these
medications were expensive broad-spectrum antibiotics. In a more
recent study, 49% of persons with URTIs received antibiotics (Ochoa
2000).
There are two published reviews of antibiotics for treating
URTIs. One review found no benefit of antibiotics for preventing
pneumonia in patients with URTI (Gadomski 1993). Another review
found that antibiotics had no benefit in children and that there was
no strong evidence of significant adverse eﬀects (Fahey 1998).
The presence of purulent nasal discharge (or a runny nose with
coloured discharge) has repeatedly been shown to be an important
determinant of antibiotic prescribing for respiratory tract infections
for both adults and children (Arroll 2000; Gonzales 1999; Mainous
1997). In one study, no General Practitioners said they would give
antibiotics for clear rhinitis, yet 72% said they would for purulent
rhinitis (Arroll 2000). A survey found that primary care physicians
were far more likely to prescribe an antibiotic for a patient with a
cold involving coloured nasal discharge than for a patient without
coloured nasal discharge (Mainous 1997). Another study found
purulent nasal discharge was a stronger predictor of prescribing
antibiotics than any other patient characteristic (Gonzales 1999).
Guidelines usually advise against antibiotics for acute purulent
rhinitis (Rosenstein 1998; Snow 2001) yet evidence supporting
such recommendations comes from a limited number of small
studies of varying methodological quality. Some studies have
found no evidence that antibiotics reduce the duration of acute
purulent rhinitis (Todd 1984) whereas a recent larger study reported
that treatment with amoxicillin reduced the duration of purulent
rhinorrhoea; although there was no significant diﬀerence between
the groups in terms of general symptom improvement (De Sutter
2002).
It is important to obtain an estimate of the eﬀectiveness of
antibiotics for the common cold to support judicious use of these
important medicines, particularly because URTIs are so common. If
ineﬀective, as has long been thought, widespread use of antibiotics
is not only a poor use of health funds but also a cause of
unnecessary morbidity from adverse eﬀects and of development
of resistant strains (Arason 1996; Verkatesum 1995). If antibiotics
were shown to be eﬀective for the common cold then society
may be willing to tolerate the increase of resistance with an
appropriate reduction in the symptoms. Other reviews to date
have not specifically considered the eﬀect of antibiotics in acute
purulent rhinitis. The current review expands on previous reviews
by considering the eﬀects of antibiotics on the speed of resolution
of common cold symptoms in both adults and children, and by
examining the evidence for antibiotics in both acute purulent
rhinitis and acute clear rhinitis.
Description of the condition
The common cold, or acute upper respiratory tract infection (URTI),
is an illness with evidence of acute inflammation of the nasal
(rhinitis) or pharyngeal mucosa (sore throat) and the absence
of other specifically defined respiratory conditions, for example
streptococcal tonsillitis, laryngitis, bronchitis, pneumonia, asthma
and hay fever. Acute purulent rhinitis is the presence of coloured
discharge, from one or both nostrils, that has persisted for less than
10 days. The choice of less than 10 days is based on the inclusion
criteria for the Cochrane Review on chronic purulent rhinitis which
included patients with 10 or more days of purulent rhinitis (Morris
2007).
Description of the intervention
The intervention in this review is antibiotics of any kind or placebo
given to participants within seven days of the onset of common cold
symptoms.
How the intervention might work
Antibiotics are thought to work on bacterial complications of the
common cold, as they have no direct eﬀect on the viruses.
Why it is important to do this review
There is evidence that too many antibiotics are being used. Of the
top 18 medications prescribed in New Zealand in 2008, three were
antibiotics. Two of them are mainly used for respiratory infections
and the number of prescriptions totaled 1,608,000 for a population
of about four million people (Pharmac 2008).
O B J E C T I V E S
1. To determine the eﬀicacy of antibiotics compared with placebo
for reducing general and specific nasopharyngeal symptoms of
acute URTIs (common colds).
2. To determine if antibiotics have any influence on the outcomes
for acute purulent rhinitis and acute clear rhinitis lasting less
than 10 days before the intervention.
3. To determine whether there are significant adverse outcomes
associated with antibiotic therapy for participants with a clinical
diagnosis of acute URTI or acute purulent rhinitis.
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
3

[page 6]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
M E T H O D S
Criteria for considering studies for this review
Types of studies
All trials in which participants with the diagnosis of acute upper
respiratory tract infection (URTI) were randomly assigned to
treatment with an antibiotic or a placebo; also all trials in which the
majority of participants had acute purulent rhinitis of less than 10
days duration. We included trials allowing concurrent use of other
medications if they allowed equal access for participants in both
the antibiotic and placebo group.
We excluded studies for the following reasons.
1. If they involved the use of an active substance (such as cough
mixtures or anti-pyretics/analgesics) instead of a placebo as
these substances may help or suppress symptoms, thereby
giving a false measure of the antibiotic's eﬀectiveness. Trials
comparing one antibiotic with another, or trials comparing the
use of antibiotics versus other medications, were not included.
2. If antibiotics were given prophylactically, that is given
to asymptomatic individuals, for many weeks to prevent
symptoms of acute URTI.
3. If more than 5% of participants had throat swabs positive
for beta haemolytic streptococcal infection. In the sore throat
review by Del Mar 1992, the lowest percentage of participants
with streptococci on throat swab was 8%, hence our choice of
5%. Two studies (Haight 1954; Hardy 1956) were excluded by this
criterion but neither had data that could be analysed. We accept
the contradiction that some studies may include participants
with streptococcal infections or colonisation due to the fact
that they have not performed throat cultures. There is also the
issue of contaminants, which may be as high as 57% in children
under 15 years with pharyngitis (Kaplan 1971), hence our desire
to remove studies with high proportions of participants with
positive throat cultures.
4. If not randomised.
5. If participants had past histories of serious illness, for example
chronic obstructive respiratory disease where antibiotics have
been shown to be eﬀective in treating exacerbations.
6. If the participants had been given the diagnosis of bronchitis.
The International Classification of Health Problems in Primary
Care (ICHPPC) definition of bronchitis (Spector 1995) is a definite
cough with abnormal chest signs: scattered or generalised,
coarse or moist sounds, or wheeze. This definition is not always
used by trialists and probably not by General Practitioners (Arroll
2001).
7. If the participants had more than seven days of symptoms at the
time of study entry. This is an arbitrary duration to avoid post
viral syndromes.
8. If participants were treated with two or more medications, that
is in situations where co-interventions could be an issue.
9. If participants were diagnosed with pharyngitis not conforming
to the ICHPPC (Spector 1995).
10.If they did not include a placebo arm.
Types of participants
The analysis of the eﬀect of antibiotics on general symptoms of
the common cold included participants of all ages who had been
diagnosed with an acute URTI and had symptoms for seven days
or less. We excluded trials in which the majority of participants
had been diagnosed with pharyngitis or bronchitis conforming
to the International Classification of Health Problems in Primary
Care (ICHPPC 1986) definition. Lower respiratory tract signs were
accepted in participants with the above symptoms, so long as the
majority of participants in the study did not have these signs and
pneumonia was ruled out.
Types of interventions
Antibiotic therapy versus placebo. We included trials which allowed
concurrent use of other medications if they allowed equal access
for participants in both the antibiotic and placebo group. We
excluded studies if they did not compare antibiotic with placebo
but instead used aspirin or antitussives in the control group.
Types of outcome measures
The outcome measures included persistence of symptoms of
nasopharyngeal inflammation (rhinitis, sore throat and sneezing),
global rating of health and any adverse eﬀects.
Primary outcomes
1. For the common cold: persisting symptoms.
2. For acute purulent rhinitis: persistent purulent rhinitis.
Secondary outcomes
1. For both the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis: adverse
eﬀects.
2. For the common cold: sore throat, loss of time at work, loss of
appetite, sneezing.
3. For purulent rhinitis: persisting purulent rhinitis on currently
available medication.
Search methods for identification of studies
Electronic searches
For this 2013 update we searched the Cochrane Central Register
of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) 2013, Issue 1, part of The Cochrane
Library, www.thecochranelibrary.com (accessed 26 March 2013),
which contains the Cochrane Acute Respiratory Infections Group's
Specialised Register, MEDLINE (March 2005 to February 2013),
EMBASE (January 2010 to February 2013), CINAHL (2005 to
February 2013), LILACS (2005 to February 2013) and Biosis Previews
(2005 to February 2013).
We used the following search strategy to search MEDLINE
and CENTRAL. We combined the MEDLINE search strategy with
the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifying
randomised trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity- and precision-
maximising version (2008 revision); Ovid format (Lefebvre 2011).
We adapted this search strategy to search EMBASE (Appendix 1),
CINAHL (Appendix 2), LILACS (Appendix 3) and Biosis Previews
(Appendix 4). The search strategy has been amended since the last
published version as the authors have now extended the review to
include persistent nasal discharge (rhinosinusitis). Details of earlier
searches are in Appendix 5.
MEDLINE (Ovid)
1 Respiratory Tract Infections/
2 (upper adj3 respiratory tract infection*).tw.
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
4

[page 7]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
3 (upper adj3 respiratory infection*).tw.
4 urti.tw.
5 Common Cold/
6 common cold*.tw.
7 head cold*.tw.
8 coryza.tw.
9 Rhinitis/
10 rhinit*.tw.
11 rhinosinusit*.tw.
12 nasosinusit*.tw.
13 (rhinorrhoea or rhinorrhoea).tw.
14 Nasal Obstruction/
15 ((runny or running or discharg* or congest* or blocked or stuﬀ*
or dripping) adj2 (nose* or nasal)).tw.
16 pharyngitis/ or nasopharyngitis/
17 (pharyngit* or nasopharyngit*).tw.
18 rhinopharyngit*.tw.
19 Paranasal Sinus Diseases/
20 exp Sinusitis/
21 sinusit*.tw.
22 exp Laryngitis/
23 laryngit*.tw.
24 sore throat*.tw.
25 or/1-24
26 exp Anti-Bacterial Agents/
27 antibiotic*.tw,nm.
28 (amoxicillin* or amoxycillin* or ampicillin* or penicillin* or
tetracycline* or erythromycin* or oxytetracycline* or azithromycin*
or ciprofloxacin* or pivampicillin* or cefuroxime* or augmentin*
or co-trimoxazole* or cefoxitin* or cefriaxone* or cefixime* or
norfloxacin* or cefazidime* or cefaclor* or ofloxacin*).tw,nm.
29 exp Sulfamethoxazole/
30 
(sulphamethoxazole 
or 
sulfamethoxazole 
or
sulfisoxazole).tw,nm.
31 or/26-30
32 25 and 31
Searching other resources
We wrote to the trial authors of all the included studies and asked
them if they knew of any unpublished material. We did not find any
additional papers by this mechanism.
Data collection and analysis
Selection of studies
The two review authors (BA, TK) independently checked the
abstracts from the searches and selected the papers. We resolved
disagreements through discussion. The Herne 1980 trial was
translated from French to English. One paper was excluded because
a placebo was not used in the control group (Sutrisna 1991).
Data extraction and management
The two review authors (BA, TK) selected the relevant abstracts
afer the full papers were obtained. The two review authors (BA,
TK) independently extracted data and we resolved disagreements
through discussion.
Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
We used the Cochrane 'Risk of bias' tool for assessing bias (Higgins
2011) with consideration of: adequate sequence generation,
concealment of allocation, adequate blinding, incomplete
outcome reporting and freedom from selective reporting. The two
review authors (BA, TK) independently assessed trial quality and
any diﬀerences were resolved through discussion.
Measures of treatment eﬀect
We used the risk ratio (RR) exclusively for dichotomous data.
Unit of analysis issues
All trials were standard parallel design randomised controlled trials
(RCTs). The individual patient was the unit of analysis.
Dealing with missing data
None of the trials in this review except De Sutter 2002 conducted
an intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis. All our results are per protocol
analyses.
Assessment of heterogeneity
We assessed heterogeneity using the I2 statistic. When the I2
statistic was over 50% we changed the analysis from fixed-eﬀect to
random-eﬀects.
Assessment of reporting biases
The majority of our studies were negative and this, to some
extent, guards against publication bias. The one positive study
may have included participants with bacterial conditions such as
streptococcal tonsillitis.
Data synthesis
We conducted a meta-analysis using the Review Manager (RevMan
2012) sofware.
Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
There was no subgroup analysis.
Sensitivity analysis
We conducted a sensitivity analysis on the main analysis of
persisting symptoms and omitted the trial by Herne 1980. This
changed the I2 statistic from 54% to 0%. The Herne trial was
the outlier in that it was the only statistically significant trial in
the common cold section of the review and may have contained
participants with streptococcal tonsillitis. We conducted another
sensitivity analysis with the adverse eﬀects for all the trials. This
showed a statistically significant result in adults but not in children.
The other sensitivity analysis was in the persistent purulent rhinitis
outcome where the Herne trial was added for both clear and
purulent rhinitis. When the Herne trial was added as purulent, the
reduction in symptoms was just statistically significant. This did not
change the conclusions.
R E S U L T S
Description of studies
Results of the search
See Appendix 2 for details of previous searches. In the 2009 search
we identified 545 papers. None of them met the inclusion criteria
for this review. The 2013 search of the electronic resources retrieved
1128 records.
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
5

[page 8]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Included studies
Types of participants
Ten studies contributed data to the meta-analyses. A further trial
(Gordon 1974) reported only summary statistics, without providing
any numerical data that could be included in the meta-analyses.
Six studies contributed to one or more analyses of common
cold outcomes (up to 1147 participants) and five contributed to
one or more analyses of purulent rhinitis outcomes (up to 791
participants). Two contributed to both (Herne 1980; Taylor 1977).
One study contributed to the adverse eﬀects but did not contribute
to the other outcome data (Howie 1970). Four of the trials in this
review included children only (Gordon 1974; Lexomboon 1971;
Taylor 1977; Todd 1984). Vogt 1966 included participants recruited
from paediatricians' oﬀices, so there is an implication that these
were all children. The remaining studies included:
•
adolescents and adults with no upper limit of age (Herne 1980;
Hoaglund 1950; Kaiser 1996);
•
males aged 20 to 49 years (Howie 1970); and
•
adults up to 69 years (McKerrow 1961).
Three studies examined men only (Herne 1980; Hoaglund 1950;
Howie 1970).
Types of outcome measures
Only four studies measured the eﬀect of antibiotics on symptoms
(Herne 1980; Howie 1970; Taylor 1977; Todd 1984). The
denominator for one of these, Howie 1970, was episodes of illness
rather than the number of participants, which prevented these data
from being pooled with other studies. However, adverse eﬀects
in this study were based on individuals, hence adverse eﬀects
reported have been added to those from other studies (except for
outcomes from five participants who had adverse eﬀects with more
than one course of antibiotics and were removed from the analysis).
Types of interventions
Antibiotics used included:
•
a form of tetracycline, in five studies (Herne 1980; Hoaglund
1950; Howie 1970; Lexomboon 1971; McKerrow 1961);
•
penicillin, ampicillin and amoxicillin, and amoxicillin/clavulanic
acid, in five studies (De Sutter 2002; Gordon 1974; Kaiser 1996;
Lexomboon 1971; Taylor 1977);
•
erythromycin, in one study (Gordon 1974);
•
co-trimoxazole, in one study (Taylor 1977);
•
cephalosporin, in one study (Todd 1984);
•
an antibacterial called xibornol (no longer on the market in
France or elsewhere) in one study (Herne 1980) and also
mentioned by Reynolds 1996; and
•
topical nitrofurazone, in one study (Vogt 1966).
Nasopharyngeal cultures
Kaiser 1996 performed an analysis by culture status of
three nasopharyngeal pathogens: Haemophilus influenzae (H.
influenzae), Moraxella catarrhalis (M. catarrhalis) and Streptococcus
pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae). The only trial to do throat swabs
on almost all (88 out of 89) participants was Gordon 1974. These
participants were included in the analysis. Herne 1980 excluded
some participants from the analysis because they developed a
red, pustular tonsillitis thought to be due to beta haemolytic
streptococcus.
Inclusion criteria
The inclusion criteria were either contained in the methods section
or in the title of the study. They were:
•
in Gordon 1974, participants with minor respiratory illness (in
the title) and symptoms referable to the respiratory tract, not
sick enough for the use of a placebo to be a risk;
•
in Herne 1980, non-severe upper respiratory tract infection (in
the methods);
•
in Hoaglund 1950, common cold (in the title) and local and
constitutional symptoms (in the methods);
•
in Howie 1970, minor respiratory illness (in the title) and
presence of cough, spit, purulent spit and purulent nasal
discharge;
•
in Kaiser 1996, common cold (in the title) and symptoms of nasal
congestion and rhinorrhoea (in the methods);
•
in Lexomboon 1971, upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) (in
the title) and symptoms of URTI within the last 48 hours (in the
methods);
•
in McKerrow 1961 common cold (in the title);
•
in Taylor 1977 participants with presumed viral respiratory
infection (in the title) and exclusion of participants with beta
haemolytic streptococcus on throat swabs, otitis media and
pneumonia;
•
in Todd 1984, non-transparent anterior nasal discharge (in the
methods section).
Two included studies (De Sutter 2002; Vogt 1966) focused on acute
purulent rhinitis.
Excluded studies
We excluded 31 studies. The major reason for exclusion was that
they were not placebo-controlled (usually compared to another
antibiotic or an over-the-counter medication). There were also a
number of trials conducted in the military which used prophylactic
antibiotics.
Risk of bias in included studies
All of the included trials were double-blind evaluations comparing
antibiotic with a placebo. It was assumed that blinding was
satisfactory because all studies included a statement that
medication was given in a double-blind manner and un-blinding of
participants was not reported. However, no formal description of
blinding was included in any of the trials.
The method of randomisation was marginally satisfactory for
some of the studies. In Hoaglund 1950 the pharmacist dispensed
the medication "in rotation". The method of randomisation was
"haphazard" in the study by Vogt 1966, hence there is some concern
about the methods of this study. In Lexomboon 1971 the allocation
was determined by the selection of coloured strips and only the
pharmacist knew the allocation. The method of randomisation
for the De Sutter 2002 study was by computer-generated random
number and the medications (capsules) were identical.
All but two of the studies had either inclusion criteria that selected
cases of acute viral respiratory tract infection and/or had the term
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
6

[page 9]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
viral or minor respiratory infection or common cold in the title of the
study. The exception was Todd 1984, where the children had non-
transparent nasal discharge. While there was some variation in the
inclusion criteria (for example, Gordon 1974 found 13% of children
under two years old and 16% of two- to four-year olds had clinical
signs in the chest) the study groups generally included participants
with acute URTIs. There were no extractable data in this study so
the results were not pooled.
Loss to follow-up was an issue for a number of the studies; only one
analysed results on an ITT basis (De Sutter 2002).
The overall risk of bias is presented graphically in Figure 1 and
summarised in Figure 2.
 
Figure 1.   'Risk of bias' graph: review authors' judgements about each risk of bias item presented as percentages
across all included studies.
Random sequence generation (selection bias)
Allocation concealment (selection bias)
Blinding (performance bias and detection bias): All outcomes
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): All outcomes
Selective reporting (reporting bias)
Other bias
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Low risk of bias
Unclear risk of bias
High risk of bias
 
 
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
7

[page 10]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Figure 2.   'Risk of bias' summary: review authors' judgements about each risk of bias item for each included study.
Random sequence generation (selection bias)
Allocation concealment (selection bias)
Blinding (performance bias and detection bias): All outcomes
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): All outcomes
Selective reporting (reporting bias)
Other bias
De Sutter 2002
+
+
+
+
+
−
Gordon 1974
+
?
+
?
+
?
Herne 1980
+
?
+
+
+
−
Hoaglund 1950
?
?
?
+
+
−
Howie 1970
+
+
+
?
+
+
Kaiser 1996
+
?
+
?
+
?
Lexomboon 1971
+
?
+
?
+
+
McKerrow 1961
+
+
+
+
+
−
Taylor 1977
+
?
+
+
+
−
Todd 1984
?
?
+
?
+
+
Vogt 1966
−
?
+
+
+
+
 
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
8

[page 11]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Allocation
There was a range of diﬀerent methods of randomisation.
They ranged from computerised randomisation (De Sutter 2002),
randomised and no details (Herne 1980), dispensed in rotation by
the pharmacist (Hoaglund 1950), and random selection of coloured
strips from a box (only the pharmacists knew the allocation)
(Lexomboon 1971).
Blinding
All trials had identical active and placebo medications.
Incomplete outcome data
The drop-out rate ranged from 0% (Gordon 1974; Hoaglund 1950)
to 25% (Todd 1984). There do not seem to be any diﬀerential drop-
out rates so it is unlikely that this would aﬀect the outcomes.
Selective reporting
There was no evidence of selective reporting.
Other potential sources of bias
The potential for bias in a trial of a predominantly viral condition
is that of bacterial co-morbidity. In the De Sutter 2002 trial more
then 60% of the participants had facial pain and some of these may
have had bacterial sinusitis. In the study by Herne 1980 there were
a number of participants with streptococcal tonsillitis. Both these
co-morbidities could over estimate the eﬀectiveness of treatment
and possibly did so in the Herne 1980 trial. The fact that the overall
pooling showed no eﬀect means that these trials did not aﬀect the
outcome.
Eﬀects of interventions
All analyses used the fixed-eﬀect model unless otherwise stated.
Lack of cure and persisting symptoms
Studies reported diﬀerent outcome measures but all those with
analysable data reported some general aspect of improvement.
This was defined as:
•
persistence of clinical symptoms and signs at day five (Herne
1980);
•
no benefit in 24 hours (Hoaglund 1950);
•
symptoms persistent or worse at five days (Kaiser 1996);
•
not better at day seven (Lexomboon 1971);
•
no cure or not improved in three days (McKerrow 1961);
•
not returning to normal activity (Taylor 1977); and
•
persistence of purulent nasal discharge at day 10 (De Sutter
2002).
The risk ratio (RR) of no cure or persistence was 0.83 (95%
confidence interval (CI) 0.60 to 1.14, random-eﬀects) (Analysis
1.1). When we analysed results for children and adults separately,
there was no significant finding for lack of cure or persistence
of symptoms in either group (Analysis 1.3; Analysis 1.4). Herne
1980 was the only study to show a benefit with antibiotics. Seven
participants were removed from the analysis by the investigators
because of tonsillitis and the review authors were concerned that
there may have been more in this study. When Herne 1980 was
removed from the analysis, the RR of no cure or persistence
increased to 0.96 (95% CI 0.83 to 1.11) (Analysis 1.2).
Howie 1970 reported outcomes using episodes of illness as the
denominator, which meant that the data could not be pooled with
the other studies. This study analysed antibiotic versus placebo
by signs and symptoms (cough, purulent nasal discharge, spit and
purulent spit) and found no significant diﬀerences.
Analysis by type of antibiotic was not undertaken for any of the
outcomes. The results for diﬀerent types of antibiotics were added
together in situations where more than one antibiotic was used in
a study.
The only study not to contribute to this lack of cure and persistence
of symptoms analysis (other than Howie) was Gordon 1974.
Their results were expressed as P values rather than a count of
participants with symptoms and they found that placebo was
better at relief of symptoms than ampicillin (P = 0.05); there was
no significant diﬀerence between placebo and erythromycin or
placebo and penicillin. Only two participants grew beta haemolytic
streptococcus in that study so it was decided to leave the study in
this review.
Sensitivity analysis of lack of cure and persisting symptoms
Delay starting antibiotic and low dose antibiotic
Hoaglund 1950 assessed the outcome of treatment at 24 hours afer
medication was started, that is sooner than antibiotics are thought
to work. McKerrow 1961 used 15 mg tablets three times daily for the
three tetracycline groups in their study. Today this dose would be
regarded as sub-therapeutic. Analysis excluding these two studies
did not significantly change the RR (Analysis 1.5).
Positive throat swabs
Kaiser 1996 found a significant benefit (cure) for antibiotics only
in the subset of participants who had positive nasopharyngeal
aspirates for any one of three respiratory pathogens (H. influenzae,
M. catarrhalis and S. pneumoniae), which occurred in 20% of the
study participants. Open treatment was prescribed for 11 (39%)
participants on placebo and three (10%) participants assigned
to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. When Kaiser 1996 was excluded
from the analysis there was no significant change in the eﬀect
(RR 0.74, 95% CI 0.48 to 1.13) (Analysis 1.6). We acknowledge
the contradiction of including a study with some participants
who had a bacterial diagnosis on retropharyngeal swabs while
excluding studies with participants who had positive throat swabs
for streptococcus.
Active medication in the control group
In Ackerman 1968, penicillin and tetracycline were compared with
a control group taking dextromethorphan (Robitussin), which is a
cough suppressant and for which there was some evidence that it
was eﬀective. It thus cannot be assumed to be an inert placebo.
A sensitivity analysis adding Ackerman 1968 to the other studies
made no significant diﬀerence to the RR. Also, our review was
directed at antibiotics versus placebo. Consequently this paper has
been lef out of the final analysis.
Smoking
Six of the 10 reviewed studies were in adults but smoking was
considered in only one of these studies (Howie 1970). In this study
there was no significant diﬀerence between active and placebo
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
9

[page 12]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
treatments in terms of benefit to smokers or non smokers (P value
> 0.05).
Other outcomes
Sore throat
Only two studies reported on sore throat persisting at day seven
as an outcome (Herne 1980; Taylor 1977). The RR was 0.47 95% CI
0.12 to 1.82 for persisting sore throat, with no significant diﬀerence
between the treatment groups (Analysis 4.1).
Loss of appetite
There was only one study which reported the lack of return of
appetite at day eight (Taylor 1977). The RR of a lack of return of
appetite was 0.97, 95% CI 0.44 to 2.12 (Analysis 6.1). Return of
appetite was not specified a priori as an item warranting analysis.
Loss of time at work
The only study to report loss of time at work was Howie 1970, where
the RR for any work loss per episode of illness was 0.88, 95% CI 0.69
to 1.13 (Analysis 5.1).
Sneezing
None of the studies reported sneezing as an outcome.
Adverse eﬀects
Six studies reported adverse eﬀects experienced by individual
participants. When all studies were combined there was a
significant diﬀerence for adverse eﬀects (RR 1.80, 95% CI 1.01
to 3.21; random-eﬀects model) but there was a high level of
heterogeneity (Analysis 1.7). This appeared to be due to a diﬀerence
between adults and children because when analysed separately
there was a significant diﬀerence for adults (RR 2.62, 95% CI 1.32 to
5.18; random-eﬀects model) (Analysis 1.8) but not for children (RR
0.91, 95% CI 0.51 to 1.63) Analysis 1.9; heterogeneity for the child
analysis was not significant. McKerrow 1961 did not distinguish
between the pneumoconiosis group and the oﬀice (unit) group
so the proportion of adverse eﬀects in the oﬀice unit group were
allocated in proportion to the number of participants in the two
parts of the study; with this study removed the increase in adverse
eﬀects with antibiotics was not significant (RR1.68, 95% CI 0.67 to
4.20) (Analysis 1.10). Some studies did not report adverse eﬀects
(Gordon 1974; Herne 1980; Hoaglund 1950; Lexomboon 1971; Vogt
1966). In the purulent rhinitis studies there was a statistically
significant increase in adverse eﬀects (RR 1.46, 95% CI 1.1 to 1.94)
(Analysis 3.4).
Rhinitis purulent and clear
The study by Herne 1980 did not specify if the rhinitis was purulent
or not. When this study was excluded, pooling the other four
antibiotic versus placebo studies for purulent rhinitis gave a RR
of 0.73 (95% CI 0.47 to 1.13; random-eﬀects model) (Analysis 3.1).
When Herne 1980 was added to the purulent group, the RR was
0.67 (95% CI 0.43 to 1.04; random-eﬀects model) for persisting
purulent rhinitis (Analysis 3.2). Because xibornol and inhaled
nitrofurazone are no longer available, pooling the three studies plus
the tetracycline arm of the Herne study gave a RR of 0.74 (95% CI
0.46 to 1.18; random-eﬀects model) for persisting purulent rhinitis
on currently available antibiotics (Analysis 3.3). It is worth noting
that in Howie 1970 there was no significant benefit from antibiotics
in participants with purulent nasal discharge but this study used
illnesses, not individuals, as the denominator. Antibiotics also
appeared to be not eﬀective for clear rhinitis when Herne was
added as clear rhinitis (RR 0.58, 95% CI 0.23 to 1.48; random-
eﬀects model) (Analysis 2.1). Five studies reported purulent rhinitis
with no additional explanation (Howie 1970; Kaiser 1996; Taylor
1977; Todd 1984; Vogt 1966). De Sutter 2002 defined purulent
rhinitis on a purely clinical basis (that is, the recruiting doctors
made the decision). Nineteen per cent of those in Kaiser 1996 had
radiologically confirmed sinusitis. Fify-three per cent to 56% of
participants in De Sutter 2002 reported unilateral facial pain. The
incidence of unilateral facial pain was not reported in six trials
(Herne 1980; Howie 1970; Kaiser 1996; Taylor 1977; Todd 1984; Vogt
1966).
D I S C U S S I O N
While the International Classification of Health Problems in Primary
Care (ICHPPC) gives one definition of upper respiratory tract
infection (URTI), it is not clear how rigidly this definition applies
in practice. The review authors have accepted that the diagnosis
of URTI is made on clinical grounds and treatment decisions are
made on the basis of that clinical decision. Although the range of
inclusion criteria appears wide, the review authors accept that the
majority of participants in each study in this review were suﬀering
from viral URTIs. Only three studies reported their findings in terms
of the lower respiratory tract. Gordon 1974 reported 13% of children
under two years old and 13% of those over six years to have
lower respiratory tract signs. Forty-three per cent (84 out of 197)
of participants in Taylor 1977 had auscultatory evidence of a more
extensive peripheral airways disease.
Herne 1980 included seven participants with bronchitis: four in
the tetracycline group, two in the xibornol group and one in the
placebo group. In the context we assumed this diagnosis was
mainly due to bronchospasm. We excluded studies with significant
numbers of participants with streptococci on throat swabs (see
Characteristics of excluded studies table). We included Gordon
1974, which found 2% of participants (2 of 89) with cultures of beta
haemolytic streptococci. Seven participants were excluded from
Herne 1980 because the pharynx looked as though the participants
had clinical streptococcal tonsillitis.
Other studies did not test for throat bacteria. Cultures that are
positive for streptococci may include contaminants as well as cases
of true infection. The issue of bacterial involvement is a concern
for reviews of bronchitis, sore throats and upper respiratory tract
infections. There is no overlap with Fahey's bronchitis review
(Fahey 1998) but there are two studies (Howie 1970; Kaiser 1996)
that are also in the Smith 2011 bronchitis review.
The review by Del Mar 1992 on managing sore throat included
one study that is in our review (Taylor 1977). Clearly the larger
the proportion of illnesses caused by bacteria that exist among
the cases of viral illness the more likely the findings are to show a
benefit for antibiotics. There is no other way of defining the disease
of interest other than perhaps doing nasopharyngeal aspirations,
as done in Kaiser 1996, and throat cultures on all participants. This
is not current clinical practice and the purpose of our review is to
be relevant to clinical practice.
The a priori outcomes for analysis included persistence of
symptoms of nasopharyngeal inflammation, global rating of health
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10

[page 13]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
and adverse eﬀects. The summary risk ratio (RR) for general
improvement or cure was 0.83 (95% CI 0.60 to 1.11) (Analysis 1.1).
In contrast with the Cochrane Review by Smith 2011, there was no
over-reporting of significant findings. Indeed, there was a tendency
to under-report findings and, hence, less likelihood of a type one
statistical error.
Most studies did not report adverse eﬀects. However, the summary
RR for adverse eﬀects from the four studies in adults that had
analysable data was significant. The majority of adverse eﬀects
were gastrointestinal, which is consistent with clinical anecdote. In
the two studies in children there was no significant adverse eﬀect
from antibiotics, which is consistent with the findings of Fahey
1998.
The symptoms of nasopharyngeal inflammation chosen for
analysis were sore throat and runny nose, either purulent or clear.
No studies reported sneezing as an outcome. Six trials provided
outcome data on nasopharyngeal inflammation (De Sutter 2002;
Herne 1980; Howie 1970; Todd 1984; Taylor 1977; Vogt 1966).
Data from Howie 1970 were not in a form that could be used in
this review but indicated no benefit from antibiotics for purulent
nasal discharge. Pooling the purulent rhinitis data suggested that
antibiotics are not beneficial for this condition. For runny nose
with a clear discharge there was no significant benefit when Herne
1980 and Taylor 1977 were pooled. As noted above, the definition
of the type of rhinitis in Herne 1980 was not given and hence it
was added to both clear and purulent rhinitis. There is collateral
information about this in the literature. In an acute bronchitis study
(Stott 1976) there was a lower incidence of runny nose at day seven
in the doxycycline group than in the placebo group (P < 0.01). There
is a Cochrane Review on persisting rhinosinusitis (more than 10
days duration) which shows a benefit from treating with antibiotics
(Morris 2007).
Sore throats
The finding of no benefit from antibiotics for sore throat was
expected. We would suggest the reader read the Cochrane Review
on antibiotics for sore throat (Spinks 2011). The role of bacteria
in upper respiratory tract infections, either as a causal factor or
a complication, is highlighted in Kaiser 1996. The authors make
a convincing argument for the role of three types of bacteria (H.
influenzae, M. catarrhalis and S. pneumoniae). It would be helpful
to see this work repeated in another centre. Treatment in this
subgroup resulted in one day less of symptoms.
Sinusitis or purulent rhinitis
The diﬀerence between sinusitis and acute purulent rhinitis is not
clear. There is presumably an overlap: 19% of the participants in
Kaiser 1996 had radiological sinusitis and between 53% and 56%
of the participants in De Sutter 2002 had unilateral facial pain. In
one study, which was excluded because of a greater than 10-day
duration of purulent rhinitis, all participants had to have facial X-
rays free of abnormalities (Haye 1998). In this study azithromycin
was significantly more eﬀective than placebo on the outcome of
purulent rhinitis. This suggests that participants may be able to
have purulent rhinitis without sinus involvement. These issues
need to be taken into account in future studies. The methodological
quality of the studies before 1990 was low and hence it is diﬀicult
to draw firm conclusions from these.
Generalisability
Although only three of the studies were conducted in general
practice (De Sutter 2002; Howie 1970; Taylor 1977), the others
seemed to represent a cross-section of participants seen in primary
care settings. This indicates that our results are generalisable to
the wider primary care setting if the assumption is made that
participants can self refer to these secondary care settings and use
them as primary care providers. Other study settings were:
•
a military base (Hoaglund 1950); unit staﬀ (McKerrow 1961);
•
hospital outpatients (Kaiser 1996; Lexomboon 1971);
•
paediatricians in private practice (Vogt 1966);
•
casualty clinic (Gordon 1974); and
•
military base (Herne 1980; Todd 1984).
The heterogeneity of the pooled data for adverse eﬀects from all
the studies appears to come from the diﬀerence between adverse
eﬀects in adults and children. There was no heterogeneity when
they were analysed separately. In one arm of Taylor 1977 the group
taking co-trimoxazole had more adverse eﬀects than the placebo
group, while the amoxycillin group had fewer. None of the children
were given amoxycillin/clavulanic acid, which contributed a lot
to the adverse eﬀects in Kaiser 1996. This finding in children is
consistent with Fahey 1998. That review included the two studies
in our review and three which we excluded. This negative finding in
children relates mainly to the unexpected findings in Taylor 1977.
There is no methodological reason for this and our assumption
would be that this is a chance (and erroneous) finding. The
expected finding would be for children to get more adverse eﬀects
in the antibiotic group, as was found in the Cochrane Review on
antibiotics for acute otitis media (Venekamp 2013). The adverse
eﬀects in the purulent rhinitis group were statistically significant.
Summary of main results
The RR for lack of cure or persistence of symptoms is 0.83, 95%
CI 0.60 to 1.11 (Analysis 1.1). The overall RR for adverse eﬀects for
antibiotics given to participants with the common cold is 1.8, 95%
CI 1.01 to 3.21 (Analysis 1.7) and for purulent rhinitis is 1.46, 95% CI
1.1 to 1.94 (Analysis 3.4). The overall RR for the antibiotic treatment
of persisting acute purulent rhinitis is 0.73, 95% CI 0.47 to 1.13
(Analysis 3.1). In summary, there is no benefit for antibiotics for the
common cold or acute purulent rhinitis but there is an increase in
adverse eﬀects.
Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
There is unclear risk of bias across the studies. All of the trials
were randomised controlled trials (RCTs). However, methods of
randomisation were not always clear. All the medications were
identical in each trial. Most of the participants had a viral upper
respiratory tract infection but some may have had bacterial chest
or sinus infections.
Quality of the evidence
See comments in previous section.
Potential biases in the review process
The major bias is likely to be the inclusion of participants with
bacterial disease such as streptococcal tonsillitis or bacterial
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
11

[page 14]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
sinusitis. The fact that the pooled result was not significant may
mean this is a small consideration.
Agreements and disagreements with other studies or
reviews
The findings of this study are consistent with two reviews in
children, Gadomski 1993 and Fahey 1998, which found no benefit
for antibiotics.
A U T H O R S '   C O N C L U S I O N S
Implications for practice
Antibiotics oﬀer no benefit in the initial treatment of the common
cold (acute upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs)). Antibiotics
should not be given in the first instance as they will not improve the
symptoms and adult participants will be aﬀected by their adverse
eﬀects. Antibiotics oﬀer no benefit for acute purulent rhinitis while
there is an increase in adverse eﬀects. However, if the symptoms
persist for more than 10 days then antibiotic therapy may be
beneficial (Morris 2007) and clinicians may wish to negotiate the
use of them with patients, taking into account the resistance issues.
Implications for research
Further research is needed on the role of pathogenic
nasopharyngeal bacteria and their presence in URTIs. Studies need
to be more diligent in reporting adverse eﬀects and symptoms.
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
The Charitable Trust of the Auckland Faculty of the Royal New
Zealand College of General Practice (RNZCGP) for a grant to
undertake the literature search. Thanks to Elspeth Kay for editing
the penultimate version in Arroll 2005. The authors also wish to
thank Leonard Leibovici, Mark Jones, Janet Yarrow and Dennis
Conrad for commenting on the draf Arroll 2005 review.
Antibiotics for the common cold and acute purulent rhinitis (Review)
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
12