

[page 1]
Menu
An official website of the United States government
Español
Home
About Cancer
Cancer Causes and Prevention
Risk Factors 
Diet
Antioxidants and Cancer Prevention
Antioxidants and Cancer Prevention
On This Page
What are free radicals, and do they play a role in cancer development?
What are antioxidants?
Can antioxidant supplements help prevent cancer?
Should people already diagnosed with cancer take antioxidant supplements?
What are free radicals, and do they play a role in
cancer development?
Free radicals are highly reactive chemicals that have the potential to harm cells. They are
created when an atom or a molecule (a chemical that has two or more atoms) either gains
or loses an electron (a small negatively charged particle found in atoms). Free radicals are
formed naturally in the body and play an important role in many normal cellular processes
(1, 2). At high concentrations, however, free radicals can be hazardous to the body and
damage all major components of cells, including DNA, proteins, and cell membranes. The
damage to cells caused by free radicals, especially the damage to DNA, may play a role in
the development of cancer and other health conditions (1, 2).
Abnormally high concentrations of free radicals in the body can be caused by exposure to
ionizing radiation and other environmental toxins. When ionizing radiation hits an atom or
a molecule in a cell, an electron may be lost, leading to the formation of a free radical. The
production of abnormally high levels of free radicals is the mechanism by which ionizing
radiation kills cells. Moreover, some environmental toxins, such as cigarette smoke, some
metals, and high-oxygen atmospheres, may contain large amounts of free radicals or
stimulate the body’s cells to produce more free radicals.

[page 2]
Free radicals that contain the element oxygen are the most common type of free radicals
produced in living tissue. Another name for them is “reactive oxygen species,” or “ROS” (1,
2).
What are antioxidants?
Antioxidants are chemicals that interact with and neutralize free radicals, thus preventing
them from causing damage. Antioxidants are also known as “free radical scavengers.”
The body makes some of the antioxidants that it uses to neutralize free radicals. These
antioxidants are called endogenous antioxidants. However, the body relies on external
(exogenous) sources, primarily the diet, to obtain the rest of the antioxidants it needs.
These exogenous antioxidants are commonly called dietary antioxidants. Fruits, vegetables,
and grains are rich sources of dietary antioxidants. Some dietary antioxidants are also
available as dietary supplements (1, 3).
Examples of dietary antioxidants include beta-carotene, lycopene, and vitamins A, C, and E
(alpha-tocopherol). The mineral element selenium is often thought to be a dietary
antioxidant, but the antioxidant effects of selenium are most likely due to the antioxidant
activity of proteins that have this element as an essential component (i.e., selenium-
containing proteins), and not to selenium itself (4).
Can antioxidant supplements help prevent cancer?
In laboratory and animal studies, the presence of increased levels of exogenous
antioxidants has been shown to prevent the types of free radical damage that have been
associated with cancer development. Therefore, researchers have investigated whether
taking dietary antioxidant supplements can help lower the risk of developing or dying from
cancer in humans.
Many observational studies, including case–control studies and cohort studies, have been
conducted to investigate whether the use of dietary antioxidant supplements is associated
with reduced risks of cancer in humans. Overall, these studies have yielded mixed results
(5). Because observational studies cannot adequately control for biases that might
influence study outcomes, the results of any individual observational study must be viewed
with caution.   
Randomized controlled clinical trials, however, lack most of the biases that limit the
reliability of observational studies. Therefore, randomized trials are considered to provide
the strongest and most reliable evidence of the benefit and/or harm of a health-related
intervention. To date, nine randomized controlled trials of dietary antioxidant supplements

[page 3]
for cancer prevention have been conducted worldwide. Many of the trials were sponsored
by the National Cancer Institute. The results of these nine trials are summarized below.    
Trial name,
country
(reference)
Intervention
Study subjects
Results
Linxian General
Population
Nutrition
Intervention Trial,
China (6, 7)
15 milligrams (mg)
beta-carotene, 30
mg alpha-
tocopherol, and 50
micrograms (µg)
selenium daily for
5 years
Healthy men
and women at
increased risk
of developing
esophageal
cancer and
gastric cancer
Initial: no effect on
risk of developing
either cancer;
decreased risk of
dying from gastric
cancer only Later:
no effect on risk of
dying from gastric
cancer
Later: no effect on
risk of dying from
gastric cancer
Alpha-
Tocopherol/Beta-
Carotene Cancer
Prevention Study
(ATBC), Finland (8–
12)
Alpha-tocopherol
(50 mg per day)
and/or beta-
carotene (20 mg
per day)
supplements for 5
to 8 years
Middle-aged
male smokers
Initial: increased
incidence of lung
cancer for those
who took beta-
carotene
supplements
Later:  no effect of
either supplement
on incidence of
urothelial,
pancreatic,
colorectal, renal
cell, or upper
aerodigestive tract
cancers

[page 4]
Carotene and
Retinol Efficacy
Trial (CARET),
United States (13–
15)
Daily
supplementation
with 15 mg beta-
carotene and
25,000
International Units
(IU) retinol
People at high
risk of lung
cancer because
of a history of
smoking or
exposure to
asbestos
Initial: increased
risk of lung cancer
and increased
death from all
causes—trial
ended early
Later: higher risks
of lung cancer and
all-cause mortality
persisted; no
effect on risk of
prostate cancer
Physicians' Health
Study I (PHS I),
United States (16)
Beta-carotene
supplementation
(50 mg every other
day for 12 years)
Male
physicians
No effect on
cancer incidence,
cancer mortality,
or all-cause
mortality in either
smokers or non-
smokers
Women’s Health
Study (WHS),
United States (17,
18)
Beta-carotene
supplementation
(50 mg every other
day), vitamin E
supplementation
(600 IU every other
day), and aspirin
(100 mg every
other day)
Women ages
45 and older
Initial: no benefit
or harm
associated with 2
years of beta-
carotene
supplementation
Later: no benefit
or harm
associated with 2
years of vitamin E
supplementation
Supplémentation
en Vitamines et
Minéraux
Antioxydants
Daily
supplementation
with vitamin C (120
mg), vitamin E (30
mg), beta-carotene
Men and
women
Initial: lower total
cancer and
prostate cancer
incidence and all-

[page 5]
(SU.VI.MAX) Study,
France (19–22)
(6 mg), and the
minerals selenium
(100 µg) and zinc
(20 mg) for a
median of 7.5
years
cause mortality
among men only;
increased
incidence of skin
cancer among
women only
Later: no evidence
of protective
effects in men or
harmful effects in
women within 5
years of ending
supplementation
Heart Outcomes
Prevention
Evaluation–The
Ongoing
Outcomes (HOPE–
TOO) Study,
International (23)
Daily
supplementation
with alpha-
tocopherol (400 IU)
for a median of 7
years
People
diagnosed with
cardiovascular
disease or
diabetes
No effect on
cancer incidence,
death from cancer,
or the incidence of
major
cardiovascular
events
Selenium and
Vitamin E Cancer
Prevention Trial
(SELECT), United
States (24, 25)
Daily
supplementation
with selenium (200
µg), vitamin E (400
IU), or both
Men ages 50
and older
Initial: no
reduction in
incidence of
prostate or other
cancers—trial
stopped early
Later: more
prostate cancer
cases among those
who took vitamin E
alone
Physicians' Health
Study II (PHS II),
United States (26)
400 IU vitamin E
every other day,
500 mg vitamin C
every day, or a
Male
physicians ages
50 years and
older
No reduction in
incidence of
prostate cancer or
other cancers

[page 6]
combination of the
two
Overall, these nine randomized controlled clinical trials did not provide evidence that
dietary antioxidant supplements are beneficial in primary cancer prevention. In addition, a
systematic review of the available evidence regarding the use of vitamin and mineral
supplements for the prevention of chronic diseases, including cancer, conducted for the
United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) likewise found no clear evidence of
benefit in preventing cancer (27).
It is possible that the lack of benefit in clinical studies can be explained by differences in the
effects of the tested antioxidants when they are consumed as purified chemicals as
opposed to when they are consumed in foods, which contain complex mixtures of
antioxidants, vitamins, and minerals (3). Therefore, acquiring a more complete
understanding of the antioxidant content of individual foods, how the various antioxidants
and other substances in foods interact with one another, and factors that influence the
uptake and distribution of food-derived antioxidants in the body are active areas of
ongoing cancer prevention research.
Should people already diagnosed with cancer take
antioxidant supplements?
Several randomized controlled trials, some including only small numbers of patients, have
investigated whether taking antioxidant supplements during cancer treatment alters the
effectiveness or reduces the toxicity of specific therapies (28). Although these trials had
mixed results, some found that people who took antioxidant supplements during cancer
therapy had worse outcomes, especially if they were smokers.
In some preclinical studies, antioxidants have been found to promote tumor growth and
metastasis in tumor-bearing mice and to increase the ability of circulating tumor cells to
metastasize (29–31). Until more is known about the effects of antioxidant supplements in
cancer patients, these supplements should be used with caution. Cancer patients should
inform their doctors about their use of any dietary supplement.                
Selected References

[page 7]
1. Diplock AT, Charleux JL, Crozier-Willi G, et al. Functional food science and defence
against reactive oxygen species. British Journal of Nutrition 1998;  80(Suppl 1):S77-S112.
[PubMed Abstract]
2. Valko M, Leibfritz D, Moncol J, et al. Free radicals and antioxidants in normal
physiological functions and human disease. International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell
Biology 2007; 39(1):44-84. [PubMed Abstract]
3. Bouayed J, Bohn T. Exogenous antioxidants—double-edged swords in cellular redoc
state: health beneficial effects at physiologic doses versus deleterious effects at high
doses. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity 2010; 3(4): 228-237. [PubMed Abstract]
4. Davis CD, Tsuji PA, Milner JA. Selenoproteins and Cancer Prevention. Annual Review of
Nutrition 2012; 32:73-95. [PubMed Abstract]
5. Patterson RE, White E, Kristal AR, et al. Vitamin supplements and cancer risk: the
epidemiologic evidence. Cancer Causes and Control 1997; 8(5):786-802. [PubMed
Abstract]
6. Blot WJ, Li JY, Taylor PR, et al. Nutrition intervention trials in Linxian, China:
supplementation with specific vitamin/mineral combinations, cancer incidence, and
disease-specific mortality in the general population. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 1993;85:1483–91. [PubMed Abstract]
7. Qiao YL, Dawsey SM, Kamangar F, et al. Total and cancer mortality after
supplementation with vitamins and minerals: follow-up of the Linxian General
Population Nutrition Intervention Trial. Journal of the National Cancer Institute
2009;101(7):507-518. [PubMed Abstract]
8. The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group. The effects of
vitamin E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers in male
smokers. New England Journal of Medicine 1994;330:1029–35. [PubMed Abstract]
9. Rautalahti MT, Virtamo JR, Taylor PR, et al. The effects of supplementation with alpha-
tocopherol and beta-carotene on the incidence and mortality of carcinoma of the
pancreas in a randomized, controlled trial. Cancer 1999; 86(1):37-42. [PubMed Abstract]
10. Virtamo J, Edwards BK, Virtanen M, et al. Effects of supplemental alpha-tocopherol and
beta-carotene on urinary tract cancer: incidence and mortality in a controlled trial
(Finland). Cancer Causes and Control 2000;11(10):933-939. [PubMed Abstract]
11. Albanes D, Malila N, Taylor PR, et al. Effects of supplemental alpha-tocopherol and
beta-carotene on colorectal cancer. Cancer Causes and Control 2000; 11(3):197-205.
[PubMed Abstract]
12. Wright ME, Virtamo J, Hartman AM, et al. Effects of alpha-tocopherol and beta-carotene
supplementation on upper aerodigestive tract cancers in a large, randomized
controlled trial. Cancer 2007; 109(5):891-898. [PubMed Abstract]
13. Omenn GS, Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, et al. Effects of a combination of beta
carotene and vitamin A on lung cancer and cardiovascular disease. New England Journal

[page 8]
of Medicine 1996;334(18):1150-1155. [PubMed Abstract]
14. Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, Balmes J, et al. The Beta-Carotene and Retinol Efficacy
Trial: incidence of lung cancer and cardiovascular disease mortality during 6-year
follow-up after stopping beta-carotene and retinol supplements. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute 2004;96(23):1743-1750. [PubMed Abstract]
15. Neuhouser ML, Barnett MJ, Kristal AR, et al. Dietary supplement use and prostate
cancer risk in the Carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers &
Prevention 2009;18(8):2202-2206. [PubMed Abstract]
16. Hennekens CH, Buring JE, Manson JE, Stampfer M, Rosner B, Cook NR, et al. Lack of
effect of long-term supplementation with beta carotene on the incidence of malignant
neoplasms and cardiovascular disease. New England Journal of Medicine 1996;334:1145–
9. [PubMed Abstract]
17. Lee IM, Cook NR, Manson JE. Beta-carotene supplementation and incidence of cancer
and cardiovascular disease: Women’s Health Study. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 1999;91:2102–6. [PubMed Abstract]
18. Lee IM, Cook NR, Gaziano JM, et al. Vitamin E in the primary prevention of
cardiovascular disease and cancer: the Women's Health Study: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 2005;294(1):56-65. [PubMed Abstract]
19. Hercberg S, Galan P, Preziosi P, et al. The SU.VI.MAX Study: a randomized, placebo-
controlled trial of the health effects of antioxidant vitamins and minerals. Archives of
Internal Medicine 2004;164(21):2335-2342. [PubMed Abstract]
20. Hercberg S, Kesse-Guyot E, Druesne-Pecollo N, et al. Incidence of cancers, ischemic
cardiovascular diseases and mortality during 5-year follow-up after stopping
antioxidant vitamins and minerals supplements: a postintervention follow-up in the
SU.VI.MAX Study. International Journal of Cancer 2010;127(8):1875-1881. [PubMed
Abstract]
21. Hercberg S, Ezzedine K, Guinot C, et al. Antioxidant supplementation increases the risk
of skin cancers in women but not in men. Journal of Nutrition 2007;137(9):2098-2105.
[PubMed Abstract]
22. Ezzedine K, Latreille J, Kesse-Guyot E, et al. Incidence of skin cancers during 5-year
follow-up after stopping antioxidant vitamins and mineral supplementation. European
Journal of Cancer 2010;46(18):3316-3322. [PubMed Abstract]
23. Lonn E, Bosch J, Yusuf S, et al. Effects of long-term vitamin E supplementation on
cardiovascular events and cancer: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA
2005;293(11):1338-1347. [PubMed Abstract]
24. Lippman SM, Klein EA, Goodman PJ, et al. Effect of selenium and vitamin E on risk of
prostate cancer and other cancers: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial
(SELECT). JAMA 2009;301(1):39-51. [PubMed Abstract]

[page 9]
25. Klein EA, Thompson IM, Tangen CM, et al. Vitamin E and the risk of prostate cancer: the
Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). JAMA 2011;306(14):1549-
1556. [PubMed Abstract]
26. Gaziano JM, Glynn RJ, Christen WG, et al. Vitamins E and C in the prevention of prostate
and total cancer in men: the Physicians' Health Study II randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2009;301(1):52-62. [PubMed Abstract]
27. Fortmann SP, Burda BU, Senger CA, et al. Vitamin and mineral supplements in the
primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer: an updated systematic
evidence review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Annals of Internal Medicine
2013; 159(12):824-834. [PubMed Abstract]
28. Lawenda BD, Kelly KM, Ladas EJ, et al. Should supplemental antioxidant administration
be avoided during chemotherapy and radiation therapy? Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 2008;100(11):773-783. [PubMed Abstract]
29. Sayin VI, Ibrahim MX, Larsson E, et al. Antioxidants accelerate lung cancer progression
in mice. Science Translational Medicine 2014; 6(221):221ra15. [PubMed Abstract]
30. Le Gal K, Ibrahim MX, Wiel C, et al. Antioxidants can increase melanoma metastasis in
mice. Science Translational Medicine 2015; 7(308):308re8. [PubMed Abstract]
31. Piskounova E, Agathocleous M, Murphy MM, et al. Oxidative stress inhibits distant
metastasis by human melanoma cells. Nature 2015; 527(7577):186-191. [PubMed
Abstract]
Related Resources
Causes and Prevention
Reviewed: February 6, 2017
If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for
guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please
credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the
original product's title; e.g., “Antioxidants and Cancer Prevention was originally published by the
National Cancer Institute.”
Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication
services page shows you how.

[page 10]
About
About This Website
en Español
Reuse & Copyright
Social Media
Resources
Contact Us
Publications
Dictionary of Cancer Terms
Find a Clinical Trial
Policies
Accessibility
FOIA
Privacy & Security
Disclaimers
Vulnerability Disclosure
Sign up for email
updates
Enter your email address
Sign up
National Cancer Institute
at the National Institutes of Health
Contact Us
Live Chat
1-800-4-CANCER
NCIinfo@nih.gov
Site Feedback
Follow us
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health
National Cancer Institute
USA.gov