

[page 1]
Menu
An official website of the United States government
Español
Home
About Cancer
Cancer Causes and Prevention
Risk Factors 
Common Cancer Myths and Misconceptions
Antiperspirants/Deodorants and Breast Cancer
Antiperspirants/Deodorants and Breast
Cancer
On This Page
Is there a link between antiperspirants or deodorants and breast cancer?
What is known about the ingredients in antiperspirants and deodorants?
What is known about the relationship between antiperspirants or deodorants and
breast cancer?
Where can someone get more information on breast cancer risk?
Is there a link between antiperspirants or deodorants
and breast cancer?
Because underarm antiperspirants or deodorants are applied near the breast and contain
potentially harmful ingredients, several scientists and others have suggested a possible
connection between their use and breast cancer (1, 2). However, no scientific evidence links
the use of these products to the development of breast cancer.
What is known about the ingredients in
antiperspirants and deodorants?
Aluminum-based compounds are used as the active ingredient in antiperspirants. These
compounds form a temporary “plug” within the sweat duct that stops the flow of sweat to
the skin's surface. Some research suggests that aluminum-containing underarm

[page 2]
antiperspirants, which are applied frequently and left on the skin near the breast, may be
absorbed by the skin and have estrogen-like (hormonal) effects (3).
Because estrogen can promote the growth of breast cancer cells, some scientists have
suggested that the aluminum-based compounds in antiperspirants may contribute to the
development of breast cancer (3). In addition, it has been suggested that aluminum may
have direct activity in breast tissue (4). However, no studies to date have confirmed any
substantial adverse effects of aluminum that could contribute to increased breast cancer
risks. A 2014 review concluded there was no clear evidence showing that the use of
aluminum-containing underarm antiperspirants or cosmetics increases the risk of breast
cancer (5).
Some research has focused on parabens, which are preservatives used in some deodorants
and antiperspirants that have been shown to mimic the activity of estrogen in the body’s
cells (6). It has been reported that parabens are found in breast tumors, but there is no
evidence that they cause breast cancer. Although parabens are used in many cosmetic,
food, and pharmaceutical products, most deodorants and antiperspirants in the United
States do not currently contain parabens.
What is known about the relationship between
antiperspirants or deodorants and breast cancer?
Only a few studies have investigated a possible relationship between breast cancer and
underarm antiperspirants/deodorants. One study, published in 2002, did not show any
increase in risk for breast cancer among women who reported using an underarm
antiperspirant or deodorant (7). The results also showed no increase in breast cancer risk
among women who reported using a blade (nonelectric) razor and an underarm
antiperspirant or deodorant, or among women who reported using an underarm
antiperspirant or deodorant within 1 hour of shaving with a blade razor. These conclusions
were based on interviews with 813 women with breast cancer and 793 women with no
history of breast cancer.
A subsequent study, published in 2006, also found no association between antiperspirant
use and breast cancer risk, although it included only 54 women with breast cancer and 50
women without breast cancer (8).
A 2003 retrospective cohort study examining the frequency of underarm shaving and
antiperspirant/deodorant use among 437 breast cancer survivors (2) reported younger age
at breast cancer diagnosis for women who used antiperspirants/deodorants frequently or
who started using them together with shaving at an earlier age. Because of the
retrospective nature of the study, the results are not conclusive.

[page 3]
Because studies of antiperspirants and deodorants and breast cancer have provided
conflicting results, additional research would be needed to determine whether a
relationship exists (9).
Where can someone get more information on breast
cancer risk?
People who are concerned about their breast cancer risk are encouraged to talk with their
doctor.
Information about risk factors for breast cancer is available through NCI’s Cancer
Information Service at 1–800–4–CANCER (1–800–422–6237).
Selected References
1. Darbre PD. Underarm antiperspirants/deodorants and breast cancer. Breast Cancer
Research 2009; 11 Suppl 3:S5. doi: 1186/bcr2424.
2. McGrath KG. An earlier age of breast cancer diagnosis related to more frequent use of
antiperspirants/deodorants and underarm shaving. European Journal of Cancer 2003;
12(6):479–485. [PubMed Abstract]
3. Darbre PD. Aluminium, antiperspirants and breast cancer. Journal of Inorganic
Biochemistry 2005; 99(9):1912–1919. [PubMed Abstract]
4. Darbre PD, Mannello F, Exley C. Aluminium and breast cancer: Sources of exposure,
tissue measurements and mechanisms of toxicological actions on breast biology.
Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry 2013; 128:257-261. [PubMed Abstract]
5. Willhite CC, Karyakina NA, Yokel RA, et al. Systematic review of potential health risks
posed by pharmaceutical, occupational and consumer exposures to metallic and
nanoscale aluminum, aluminum oxides, aluminum hydroxide and its soluble salts.
Critical Reviews in Toxicology 2014; 44 Suppl 4:1-80. [PubMed Abstract]
6. Final amended report on the safety assessment of Methylparaben, Ethylparaben,
Propylparaben, Isopropylparaben, Butylparaben, Isobutylparaben, and Benzylparaben
as used in cosmetic products. International Journal of Toxicology 2008; 27 Suppl 4:1-82.
doi: 10.1080/10915810802548359.
7. Mirick DK, Davis S, Thomas DB. Antiperspirant use and the risk of breast cancer. Journal
of the National Cancer Institute 2002; 94(20):1578–1580. [PubMed Abstract]
8. Fakri S, Al-Azzawi A, Al-Tawil N. Antiperspirant use as a risk factor for breast cancer in
Iraq. Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal 2006; 12(3–4):478–482. [PubMed Abstract]
9. Dieterich M, Stubert J, Reimer T, Erickson N, Berling A. Influence of lifestyle factors on
breast cancer risk. Breast Care 2014; 9(6):407-414. [PubMed Abstract]

[page 4]
Related Resources
How to Find Cancer Resources You Can Trust
Reviewed: August 9, 2016
If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for
guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please
credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the
original product's title; e.g., “Antiperspirants/Deodorants and Breast Cancer was originally
published by the National Cancer Institute.”
Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication
services page shows you how.
About
About This Website
en Español
Reuse & Copyright
Social Media
Resources
Contact Us
Publications
Dictionary of Cancer Terms
Find a Clinical Trial
Policies
Accessibility
FOIA
Privacy & Security
Disclaimers
Vulnerability Disclosure
Sign up for email
updates
Enter your email address
Sign up
National Cancer Institute
at the National Institutes of Health

[page 5]
Contact Us
Live Chat
1-800-4-CANCER
NCIinfo@nih.gov
Site Feedback
Follow us
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health
National Cancer Institute
USA.gov