

[page 1]
Apple cider vinegar for weight
loss
By Mayo Clinic Staff
March 04, 2025
Drinking apple cider vinegar for weight loss seems
far-fetched. Does it work?
Apple cider vinegar isn't likely to cause weight loss. Research hasn't proved that
this fermented juice made from crushed apples helps people slim down.
Some people claim that apple cider vinegar has many healthy effects, such as
weight loss. They say that drinking a small amount or taking a supplement before
meals helps control hunger and burn calories.
But little research exists to support this claim. Experts haven't found meaningful
weight loss or long-term hunger control with use of apple cider vinegar. And many
of the studies of apple cider vinegar and weight loss have been small or lacking in
other ways. Some small studies suggest that apple cider vinegar may have
promise as a weight-loss aid. But more research is needed.
Most people can use commercial apple cider vinegar safely in small amounts.
Some studies suggest that it's okay to have up to two tablespoons a day.
Research shows that people have used it safely for up to 12 weeks. You might be
less likely to have side effects if you add apple cider vinegar to food rather than
drink it.
Use of apple cider vinegar does have some risks. For example:

[page 2]
Apple cider vinegar is highly acidic. It may irritate your throat if you drink it
often or in large amounts. Over time, acidic drinks also can weaken the outer
layer of teeth, called enamel. In supplement form, an apple cider vinegar
tablet that gets stuck in your throat may cause long-lasting pain. This also is
due to the acid in the vinegar.
Apple cider vinegar may affect some medicines. These include common high
blood pressure treatments called diuretics and the diabetes medicine called
insulin. Apple cider vinegar also may affect supplements such as licorice and
horsetail. When apple cider vinegar affects these medicines and
supplements, levels of a key mineral in the body called potassium may
become low. The body needs potassium for nerve and muscle cells to work
properly.
Keep in mind that weight loss takes time and effort. Using a trendy drink or a
supplement alone won't help you reach your weight goal. The key is to burn more
calories than you take in from food and drinks. So focus on eating a balanced diet
and getting more physical activity. If you're not active now, you can ask your
healthcare professional to help you get started.
1. Launholt TL, et al. Safety and side effects of apple vinegar intake and its effect on metabolic
parameters and body weight: A systematic review. European Journal of Nutrition. 2020;
doi:10.1007/s00394-020-02214-3.
2. Hasan F, et al. The effects of vinegar/acetic acid intake on appetite measures and energy
consumption: A systematic literature review. Current Developments in Nutrition. 2022;
doi:10.1093/cdn/nzac053.026.
3. Apple cider vinegar. NatMed. https://naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com. Accessed July
16, 2024.
4. Aim for a healthy weight: Key recommendations. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/lose_wt/recommen.htm. Accessed July 17, 2024.
5. Abou-Khalil R, et al. Apple cider vinegar for weight management in Lebanese adolescents and
young adults with overweight and obesity: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
BMJ Nutrition, Prevention and Health. 2024; doi:10.1136/bmjnph-2023-000823.
6. Medical review (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic. July 18, 2024.
Terms & Conditions

[page 3]
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Notice of Nondiscrimination
Digital Accessibility Statement
Advertising & Sponsorship Policy
Site Map
© 1998-2026 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER).
All rights reserved.
FAQ-20058394