

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Appropriate
complementary
feeding
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Complementary feeding is defined as the process starting when breast milk alone is no
longer sufficient to meet the nutritional requirements of infants, and therefore other
foods and liquids are needed, along with breast milk. The transition from exclusive
breastfeeding to family foods – referred to as complementary feeding – typically covers
the period from 6–24 months of age, even though breastfeeding may continue to two
years of age and beyond. This is a critical period of growth during which nutrient
deficiencies and illnesses contribute globally to higher rates of undernutrition among
children under five years of age.
A number of successful strategies have been developed to improve complementary
feeding practices in low- and middle-income countries, where practical difficulties can

[page 2]
limit adherence to complementary feeding guidelines.
WHO Recommendations
Infants should be exclusively breastfed for the first six months of life to achieve optimal
growth, development and health.
Thereafter, to meet their evolving nutritional requirements, infants should receive
nutritionally adequate and safe complementary foods, while continuing to breastfeed
for up to two years or beyond.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidance on ending the inappropriate promotion of foods for infants
and young children: implementation manual
Guiding principles for feeding non-breastfed children 6-24 months of
age
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Guiding principles for complementary feeding of the breastfed child
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Educational interventions for improving primary caregiver complementary feeding practices
for children aged 24 months and under
Arikpo D, Edet ES, Chibuzor MT, Odey F, Caldwell DM. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2018;
Issue 5. Art. No.: CD011768.
Effectiveness of provision of animal‐source foods for supporting optimal growth and
development in children 6 to 59 months of age
Eaton JC, Rothpletz‐Puglia P, Dreker MR, Iannotti L, Lutter C, Kaganda J, Rayco‐Solon P. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews. 2019; Issue 2. Art. No.: CD012818.
Other related systematic reviews
Impact of education and provision of complementary feeding on growth and morbidity in
children less than 2 years of age in developing countries: a systematic review
Lassi ZS, Das JK, Zahid G, Imdad A, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2013; 13 Suppl3:S13.
Systematic review of the efficacy and effectiveness of complementary feeding interventions in
developing countries
Dewey KG, Adu-Afarwuah S. Maternal & Child Nutrition. 2008; 4:24–85.
Impact of maternal education about complementary feeding and provision of complementary
foods on child growth in developing countries
Imdad A, Yakoob MY, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2011; 13;11 Suppl 3:S25.
Learn More 
Cost-effectivenеss

[page 4]
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The cost-effectiveness of a child nutrition education programme in Peru
Waters HR, Penny ME, Creed-Kanashiro HM, Robert RC, Narro R, Willis J, et al. Health Policy Plan. 2006;
21(4):257-64.
Cost effectiveness analysis of strategies for child health in developing countries
Edejer TT, Aikins M, Black R, Wolfson L, Hutubessy R, Evans DB. BMJ. 2005; 331(7526):1177.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Complementary Feeding
Interventions for improving
complementary feeding practices
Category 2 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Commentary

[page 5]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO