

[page 1]
Menu
An official website of the United States government
Español
Home
About Cancer
Cancer Causes and Prevention
Risk Factors 
Cancer-Causing Substances
Aristolochic Acids
Aristolochia clematitis, a plant that
contains aristolochic acids.
Aristolochic Acids
What are aristolochic acids?
Aristolochic acids are a group of acids found
naturally in many types of plants known as
Aristolochia (birthworts or pipevines) and some
types of plants known as Asarum (wild ginger),
which grow worldwide.
How are aristolochic acids used?
Plants containing aristolochic acids are used in
some herbal products intended to treat a variety
of symptoms and diseases, such as arthritis, gout,
and inflammation. These products have not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and are often marketed as dietary supplements or “traditional
medicines.” 
How are people exposed to aristolochic acids?
Exposure may occur through intentionally or unknowingly eating or drinking herbal or food
products that contain aristolochic acids. 
Which cancers are associated with exposure to aristolochic
acids?
Cancers of the upper urinary tract (renal pelvis and ureter) and bladder have been reported
among individuals who had kidney damage caused by the consumption of herbal products

[page 2]
containing aristolochic acids.
How can exposures be reduced?
To reduce your risk, do not use herbal products that contain aristolochic acids. The FDA
provides a list of some products containing aristolochic acids.
Selected References:
National Toxicology Program. Aristolochic Acids, Report on Carcinogens, Fifteenth Edition.
Triangle Park, NC: National Institute of Environmental Health and Safety, 2021. Also
available online. Last accessed December 5, 2022.
Reviewed: December 5, 2022
If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for
guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please
credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the
original product's title; e.g., “Aristolochic Acids was originally published by the National Cancer
Institute.”
About
About This Website
en Español
Reuse & Copyright
Social Media
Resources
Contact Us
Publications
Dictionary of Cancer Terms
Find a Clinical Trial
Policies
Accessibility
FOIA
Privacy & Security
Disclaimers
Sign up for email
updates
Enter your email address
Sign up

[page 3]
Vulnerability Disclosure
National Cancer Institute
at the National Institutes of Health
Contact Us
Live Chat
1-800-4-CANCER
NCIinfo@nih.gov
Site Feedback
Follow us
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health
National Cancer Institute
USA.gov