

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Assessment for
nutrition-related
disorders in women
during pregnancy
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Antenatal screening is important to help prevent poor maternal and perinatal
outcomes. While screening for pre-eclampsia and blood pressure are considered
routine, screening for anaemia and hyperglycaemia are also important.
It is estimated that in 2011, more than 40% of pregnant women worldwide were
anaemic. Anaemia increases perinatal risks for mothers and newborns and contributes
to preventable mortality. Accurate, low-cost, simple-to-use tests to detect anaemia

[page 2]
might improve the identification and subsequent management of women with
anaemia, particularly severe anaemia, in resource-limited settings.
Evidence indicates that women with hyperglycaemia (i.e. diabetes mellitus and
gestational diabetes mellitus) during pregnancy are at greater risk of adverse
pregnancy outcomes including macrosomia, pre-eclampsia/hypertensive disorders in
pregnancy, and shoulder dystocia*. Identifying gestational diabetes mellitus during
pregnancy allows for effective treatment which may consist of lifestyle changes (e.g.
nutritional counselling and exercise) followed by oral blood glucose-lowering agents or
insulin, if necessary. WHO currently does not have a recommendation on whether or
how to screen for gestational diabetes mellitus, and screening strategies for gestational
diabetes mellitus are considered a priority area for research, particularly in resource-
limited settings.
*Obstructed labour in which the shoulder of the infant cannot be delivered or is
delivered with difficulty after delivery of the infant’s head.
fasting plasma glucose 5.1-6.9 mmol/l (92 -125 mg/dl)
1-hour plasma glucose ≥10.0 mmol/l (180 mg/dl) following a 75g oral glucose load
2-hour plasma glucose 8.5-11.0 mmol/l (153 -199 mg/dl) following a 75g oral glucose
load
fasting plasma glucose ≥7.0 mmol/l (126 mg/ dl)
2-hour plasma glucose ≥11.1 mmol/l (200 mg/dl) following a 75g oral glucose load
WHO Recommendations
Full blood count testing is the recommended method for diagnosing anaemia during
pregnancy. Where fully blood count testing is not available, onsite haemoglobin testing
with a hamoglobinometer is recommended over the haemoglobin colour scale method
as the method for detecting anaemia.
Hyperglycaemia first detected at any time during pregnancy should be classified as
either, gestational diabetes mellitus or diabetes mellitus in pregnancy, according to
WHO 2013 criteria.*
* This recommendation has been adapted and integrated from the WHO ‘Diagnostic
criteria and classification of hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy’ (2013), which
states that GDM should be diagnosed at any time in pregnancy if one or more of the
following criteria are met:
Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy should be diagnosed by the 2006 WHO criteria for
diabetes if one or more of the following criteria are met:

[page 3]
random plasma glucose ≥11.1 mmol/l (200 mg/ dl) in the presence of diabetes
symptoms
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy
experience
Diagnostic criteria and classification of hyperglycaemia first detected
in pregnancy
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Accuracy of on-site tests to detect anaemia in antenatal care: a systematic review (In
press)
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO