

[page 4]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
3 
 
Abbreviations 
 
OSA 
PBH 
PBHWB 
PRISMA 
 
PSG 
RCT 
REM 
SE 
SOL 
SWS 
TIB 
TST 
WASO 
y 
 
Oguri-Shirakawa-Azumi questionnaire 
passive body heating 
water-based passive body heating 
preferred reporting items for 
systematic reviews and meta-analysis 
polysomnography 
randomized control trial 
rapid eye movement 
sleep efficiency 
sleep onset latency 
slow wave sleep 
traumatic brain injury 
total sleep time 
wake after sleep onset 
year 
AVA 
CBT 
CI 
∆CBT 
 
DPG 
 
EEG 
EMG 
EOG 
ES 
h 
ICU 
JBI 
min 
arteriovenous anastomoses 
core body temperature 
confidence interval 
attenuation in core body 
temperature 
distal-to-proximal skin 
temperature gradient 
electroencephalogram 
electromyography 
electrooculogram 
effect size 
hour 
intensive care unit 
Joanna Briggs Institute 
Minutes

[page 5]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
4 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Bathing has long been linked not only with cleanliness and spiritual and religious purification 
[1] but health preservation and rehabilitation [2]. During the Homeric era of 1200 to 800 BC 
55 
bathing was viewed exclusively as hygienic [2]; however, Hippocrates (460–370 BC) regarded it 
as health promoting and therapeutic. The Romans also considered it to be curative, in addition to 
relaxing and pleasurable [2]. During the 16th century, bathing, especially in spring waters, was 
pursued for healing, and commencing in the 19th century spas specializing in hot and cold 
mineral baths, commonly combined with mud packs, physical exercise, massage, and special 
60 
diets, became popular as a holistic remedy of diverse maladies [2]. Indeed, at this time warm 
baths were extensively extolled for their healthful benefits, being advocated, for example, in the 
United States by Dr. John Gunn in his popular home medical handbook, ‘Gunn’s Domestic 
Medicine’ [3]. However, there seems to be no evidence warm or hot baths were specifically used 
to facilitate or improve sleep until the 20th century, as reviewed by Raymann et al. [4].  
65 
In this content, the relationship between blood distribution, body temperature, and states of 
sleep and wakefulness has long been of interest. The Greek philosopher Alcmeaon of Croton, 
~500 BC, associated the state of sleep with the withdrawal of blood from the periphery to the 
larger “blood-flowing” vessels and waking with its “rediffusion” [5], and the 7th century essayist 
Robert Burton wrote “A hot brain does not sleep” [6]. In the 19th century Davy and Jürgensen 
70 
described the human temperature circadian rhythm characterized by elevated daytime and 
depressed nighttime level [7,8], and Dalton elucidated the “normal variations of temperature in 
the living body”, with differences between central and peripheral sites [9]. Collectively, these 
theoretical conceptualizations and scientific discoveries laid the foundation for contemporary 
investigations substantiating association between sleep and decline at the end of the activity span 
75

[page 6]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
5 
 
of core and brain temperature achieved by circadian rhythms governing the dissipation of body 
heat [10–13]. Accordingly, alteration of the temperature circadian rhythm, e.g., by disease, work 
schedule, and transmeridian travel, is commonly associated with episodic or chronic insomnia -- 
prolonged sleep onset latency (SOL) and/or poor sleep maintenance [14–18]. The estimated 
prevalence of insomnia of various etiology, including that directly or indirectly associated with 
80 
perturbed temperature circadian rhythm, is substantial, being 1.5-fold higher in women than men 
and much higher in the elderly than young [4,19–23]. The consequent sleep deprivation 
compromises quality of life and productivity and increases vulnerability for accidents and injury 
[24]. Moreover, it is implicated as a cause or effect of psychiatric, cardiovascular, metabolic, and 
other medical conditions, whose healthcare expenditures globally amount to billions of dollars 
85 
annually [19,21,25].  
Water-based passive body heating (PBHWB) accomplished by warm/hot showers or body or 
foot bathing is often recommended as a simple and low-cost nonpharmacological means of 
managing insomnia [26–28]. Such advice largely derives from findings of questionnaire and 
observation-based investigations. For example, Aritake-Okada et al. [29] found bathing to be an 
90 
effective means of improving nighttime sleep and decreasing excessive daytime sleepiness; 
Ojima et al. [30] reported good subjective sleep quality of persons who regularly bathe; 
Hayasaka et al. [31] detected positive relationship between frequent bathing and self-assessed 
sleep quality and Goto et al. [32] likewise demonstrated positive association between frequent 
bathing combined with onsen (hot springs) facilities and self-rated sleep quality; and Camilleri 
95 
and Barrett [33] observed better sleep of seniors with late-day bathing. Findings of objective 
laboratory studies complement the positive effects of PBHWB inferred by subjective measures. 
Yu et al. [34] found footbath PBHWB more acceptable by men than women and more effective in

[page 7]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
6 
 
winter than summer; Raymann et al. [35] showed skin temperature manipulation by PBHWB 
strongly influences amount of rapid eye movement (REM) and slow wave sleep (SWS); and 
100 
Deguchi et al. [36] described immediate (after 2 weeks) and more substantial long-term (after 4-
6 weeks) improvement in sleep, along with reduction in restlessness, wandering, and/or 
aggression, in 60-90% of a small cohort of senile dementia patients when bathed twice weekly in 
the early evening (18:00-19:00h) than early afternoon (14:00-15:00h). Nonetheless, while many 
investigations demonstrate improvement of various sleep parameters by evening or before 
105 
bedtime PBHWB treatment, some do not [4,37,38]. The goal of this article is to review the 
published research concerning the potential beneficial effects of PBHWB on nighttime sleep and 
proposed mechanisms. 
 
METHODS 
110 
The review was conducted in adherence with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
reviews and Meta Analyses (PRISMA) statement [39]. The PRISMA checklist is provided in 
Appendix A. 
Search strategy. We performed online searches in April 2018 of PubMed, CINAHL, 
Cochran, Medline, PsycInfo, and Web of Science databases, without restriction of date or 
115 
language of publication, using the keywords and their combinations presented in Table S1 to 
retrieve studies pertaining to sleep outcomes of bath and shower PBHWB interventions. 
References of qualifying investigations and related review papers were additionally examined for 
eligible publications. An example of the strategy used for the PubMed search is illustrated in 
Appendix B of the supplementary materials.  
120

[page 8]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
7 
 
Eligibility criteria. Inclusion of retrieved publications for systematic review required 
satisfaction of the following criteria: 1) full-night investigation of the effect of PBHWB on sleep 
quality and/or sleep parameters, 2) body heating by a water-based, i.e., showering or bathing, 
method alone, and 3) report of original data and findings of statistical analyses. Exclusion criteria 
were: 1) continued body warming during sleep, 2) unreported or insufficient details of 
125 
investigative methods or results, 3) unspecified interval of time between PBHWB treatment and 
bedtime, 4) absence of information on duration of PBHWB, 5) lack of information on temperature 
of the intervention, 6) PBHWB combined with another treatment, 7) non-provision of control or 
baseline data, 8) treatment other than water-based methods of showering or bathing, such as 
heating blankets, 9) duplicate report based on same data, and 10) published review of the 
130 
literature. The same inclusion and exclusion criteria were also used for meta-analysis of retrieved 
publications specifically relating to sleep parameters. However, the variable of “subjective sleep 
quality” and the studies where sleep parameters were measured by questionnaire or interview 
check list were excluded from meta-analyses. This is because the scoring system and range of the 
diverse methods utilized in the different studies are dissimilar and not quantitatively comparable. 
135 
Nonetheless, we include the findings of these studies in our systematic review, since they 
provide valuable perspective about the utility of PBHWB as a sleep aid. 
 
Study selection. Retrieved citations were imported into Mendeley reference manager 
software. After removal of redundant reports from search of the multiple databases, irrelevant 
140 
publications were eliminated by review of titles, abstracts, and keywords by one of the authors 
(SH). Full text review of all remaining published articles was accomplished independently by 
two authors (SH and SK). Decisions regarding eligibility of investigations were based on the

[page 9]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
8 
 
above-outlined a priori established inclusion and exclusion criteria, and reasons for exclusion 
were recorded. Disagreements were resolved by discussion. Three studies trialed two different 
145 
temperatures; in this case the resulting data of only the highest (≥40 oC) temperature intervention 
were included in meta-analyses. 
 
Data extraction and data items. A data extraction sheet was developed and revised after 
pilot-testing on five randomly selected eligible studies. One author (SH) extracted data and a 
150 
second (SK) checked accuracy. The following particulars were extracted: first author and year of 
publication; research questions/study aims; number, type, sex, and age of subjects; temperature, 
method, and duration of PBHWB intervention; interval between application of PBHWB treatment 
and bedtime; mode of sleep assessment, and effect of PBHWB therapy on SOL, wake after sleep 
onset (WASO), total sleep time (TST), sleep efficiency (SE), slow wave sleep (SWS), and 
155 
subjective sleep quality.  
  
Bias assessment (Tables S2 and S3). Each included study was independently evaluated for 
risk of bias due to deficiencies of investigative methods and procedures using the Joanna Briggs 
Institute (JBI) checklist for quasi-experimental studies [40]. Adapted JBI checklists were applied 
160 
for randomized control trials (RCT) [40] and prospective cohort studies [41]. We additionally 
created a checklist for crossover studies based on JBI recommendations for RCT [40]. 
Disagreements between raters were resolved by discussion.  
 
Statistical analysis. For studies amenable to meta-analysis, effect size (ES, Cohen’s d) of the 
165 
sleep parameters of SOL, WASO, TST, SE, and SWS was calculated by deriving the mean

[page 10]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
9 
 
difference between the baseline and treatment nights and dividing it by the pooled standard 
deviation [42]. Some trials reported values for each experimental night or individual groups of 
subjects rather than aggregate ones; in these cases, we combined or pooled data to derive a single 
mean and standard deviation per experimental, i.e., baseline and PHBWB, condition  [43,44]. A 
170 
positive ES infers lower value of a given parameter on baseline than treatment nights. ES values 
equal to 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8 are considered, respectively, small, medium, and large effects [45]. We 
used a random effect model to calculate the summary effect per evaluated sleep parameter [44]. 
P<0.05 is considered sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis ES equals zero. Presence of 
heterogeneity was assessed by calculation of the Q statistic, which follows the χ2 distribution. 
175 
The null hypothesis for this test is all studies share a common ES [44]. The derived τ2 and I2 
statistics represent, respectively, the overall variance of the true effect size and proportion of 
observed variance indicative of the actual variation among studies [44]. When heterogeneity was 
substantiated, potential explanations were explored post hoc by both random-effect subgroup and 
meta-regression analyses [44]. Subgroup analysis assesses the disparity across subgroup effects 
180 
relative to the precision of the difference in values for variables of interest within subgroups [44]. 
The precision of this difference is affected by within-study variance and total number of subjects, 
between-study variance and total number of studies, and between-subgroup variance and number 
of subgroups [46]. Several studies and guidelines [47–49] recommend the meta-regression 
method as a more advance approach of higher statistical power compared to subgroup analysis 
185 
[50] to evaluate potential significance of independent categorical effect-modifier variables. 
Moreover, this method allows us to simultaneously investigate the effect of multiple effect 
modifiers [47]. As recommended, we used a cut-off of 10% (P=0.1) for testing the significance 
of heterogeneity and also for subsequent post-hoc evaluation of effect modifiers [51,52]. Forest

[page 11]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
10 
 
plots, i.e., graphical display of findings of individual investigations plus composite overall 
190 
findings per sleep parameter, were created by Microsoft Excel for Mac (version 16.8, Microsoft 
Corporation, Redmond, Washington, USA). The meta-regression was done using R (R Core 
Team, 2018). Publication bias was assessed by the funnel plot regression method [53] for all 
sleep parameters using STATA software (version SE 14.2, StataCorp LLC, College Station, 
Texas, USA). 
195 
 
 
RESULTS 
Search results  
The flow diagram of Figure 1 depicts the PRISMA-based process of selecting investigations 
200 
of relevance utilizing the search words depicted in Table S1. A total of 5316 publications were 
retrieved, of which 1451 were replicates. Six additional publications were identified through 
reference lists or other sources. Abstracts of the potentially relevant 3865 total publications were 
individually screened, yielding 121 for full text appraisal, of which 17 met all inclusion criteria. 
Some 13 [37,38,54–64] of the qualifying 17 investigations enabled quantitative synthesis and 
205 
meta-analyses. One of these studies utilized two -- body and foot bath -- PBHWB treatments, 
thereby increasing the number of possible comparisons to 14. 
 
[Figure 1 goes here] 
 
210 
Overview of included studies (Table 1)

[page 12]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
11 
 
Study design. Of the 17 studies that met inclusion criteria, 11 were designed as a crossover 
[37,38,54–58,60–63], three as a quasi-experimental [59,65,66], one as a randomized control [67], 
and two as a prospective [64,68] cohort trial. 
 
215 
Study population. Participants of the 17 investigations, which entailed 18 PHBWB trials in 
total, were diverse, ranging from young healthy soccer athletes to middle-age traumatic brain 
injury, older sleep apnea, sleep disturbed, acute coronary syndrome, intensive care unit (ICU), 
insomniac, and cancer patients. Sample size varied markedly among the trials, from 5 to 70 
subjects (median=13), with six of them (~35%) involving more than 20 subjects. The average 
220 
age of participants also varied greatly: older than 40 y in 12 studies, with six of them greater than 
60 y. 
 
Nature of PBHWB interventions. PBHWB was achieved by shower in one study, footbath in 
nine, body bath in six, and both body bath and footbath in one. Water temperature in 16 of the 18 
225 
experiments varied from 40 to 42oC, with those of two studies testing two different temperatures.  
PBHWB commenced and ended 1 to 2h before bedtime in five trials, and it commenced and ended 
1h or less or 2h or more before bedtime in thirteen trials. PBHWB in nine trials lasted 20 min or 
less and lasted more than 20 min in nine trials. 
 
230 
Sleep assessment methods. Polysomnography (PSG) entailing electroencephalogram (EEG), 
electromyography (EMG), and electrooculogram (EOG) was utilized in nine studies, wrist 
actigraphy in five studies, self-assessment questionnaires in nine studies, and observation check

[page 13]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
12 
 
list and home-sleep tracker each in one study. Most (~65%) investigations relied only on one of 
these methods. 
235 
[Table 1 goes here] 
 
Sleep outcomes.  
Sleep onset latency (SOL). Figure 2 presents the forest plot of effect size plus overall pooled 
estimated effect size for the individual 11 PBHWB trials in which SOL was objectively assessed. 
240 
The pooled estimate reveals PBHWB achieved significant decrease of SOL independent of the 
temperature, duration, and interval of time before bedtime of its scheduling (mean of baseline 
nights 24.6 min vs. mean of PBHWB nights 17.4 min; ES: -0.43; 95% CI=-0.76 to -0.10; 
P=0.010). Studies that utilized questionnaire and/or observation checklist methods also reported 
PBHWB improved SOL [66,67]. As recommended, we used a cut-off of P=0.1 when conducting 
245 
heterogeneity analyses for between-subgroup differences [51,52]. The test of heterogeneity for 
findings of the studies assessing SOL rejected the null hypothesis of shared common ES 
(P=0.088), and the test for publication bias was insignificant (P=0.604). 
 
[Figure 2 goes here] 
250 
 
The finding of heterogeneity in the ES of studies entailing objective assessment of SOL 
prompted post hoc exploration of two hypotheses to explain its origin. First, we hypothesized an 
important source of variation in ES derives from difference across trials in the interval of time 
between the application of PBHWB and bedtime. We tested this hypothesis by categorizing the  
255 
11 trials into two groups: (i) those in which PBHWB commenced and ended 1 to 2h before

[page 14]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
13 
 
bedtime (N=2) and (ii) those in which PBHWB commenced and ended 1h or less plus those in 
which PBHWB commenced and ended 2h or more before bedtime (N=9). The random effect 
model Q test for heterogeneity with separate estimate of τ2 [44] reveals significant difference in 
effect size between the two groups (χ2=7.42, df=1, P=0.006), thereby indicating the timing of 
260 
PBHWB 1-2 h before bedtime is associated with statistically significant shortening of SOL. 
Second, we evaluated the hypothesis the duration of PBHWB acts as an effect modifier upon 
SOL. The duration of PBHWB across the 11 trials ranged between 10 min to three successive 
blocks each of 30 min, i.e., 90 min in total. We categorized the 11 trials into two groups, ones 
(N=4) that applied PBHWB for shortest duration, i.e., 10-20 mins, and ones (N=7) that applied 
265 
PBHWB for longest duration, i.e., 20-90 min. However, as reported in Table 2 no statistically 
significant between-group difference in effect on SOL is detected according to duration of 
PBHWB (χ2=1.01, df=1, P=0.314). We further evaluated the source of heterogeneity by 
conducting a random-effect model meta-regression analysis that simultaneously included both 
effect modifiers -- duration of PBHWB and interval of time between the application of PBHWB 
270 
and bedtime -- categorized in the same manner as done for the subgroup analyses. It yielded the 
same conclusion, i.e., significant effect of timing (P=0.075, i.e., below the cut-off of P=0.1 
recommended for evaluation of effect modifiers) and no significant effect according to duration 
(P=0.822). We also attempted to evaluate the water temperature as an effect modifier; however, 
the range of water temperature across the 11 trials was too small, mostly 40oC (N=6) and 41oC 
275 
(N=3), for conduct of a meaningful statistical analysis. 
    
[Table 2 goes here]

[page 15]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
14 
 
Wake after sleep onset (WASO). Figure 3 shows the forest plot of the 9 investigations in 
280 
which the WASO variable was explored. The pooled estimate of all studies indicates non-
significant improvement by PBHWB in WASO relative to baseline conditions (mean of baseline 
nights 49.2 min vs. mean of PBHWB nights 41.3 min; ES: -0.23; 95% CI=-0.48 to 0.02; P=0.067). 
The test for heterogeneity fails to reject the null hypothesis the studies share a common ES 
(P=0.924), and the test for publication bias was not significant (P=0.534). 
285 
[Figure 3 goes here] 
 
Total sleep time (TST). Figure 4 displays the forest plot of the 10 different trials in which 
TST was measured. The pooled estimate discloses non-significant improvement by PBHWB in 
TST relative to baseline conditions (mean of baseline nights 389.0 min vs. mean of PBHWB 
290 
nights 395.1 min; ES: 0.15; 95% CI=-0.08 to 0.39; P=0.199). The test for heterogeneity fails to 
reject the null hypothesis the studies share a common ES (P=0.787), and the test for publication 
bias was not significant (P=0.091). 
[Figure 4 goes here] 
 
295 
Sleep efficiency (SE). Figure 5 depicts the forest plot of the 11 different trials in which SE 
was evaluated. The pooled estimate reveals significant improvement by PBHWB in SE (mean of 
baseline nights 83.1% vs. mean of PBHWB nights 84.9%; ES: 0.26; 95% CI=0.02 to 0.51; 
P=0.035). This finding based on objective assessment of SE is in line with that of Seyyedrasooli 
et al. [67], which measured SE by questionnaire; they found a tendency of improved SE by 
300 
PBHWB relative to control conditions. The test for heterogeneity fails to reject the null hypothesis 
the studies share a common ES (P=0.500), and the test for publication bias was insignificant 
(P=0.212).

[page 16]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
15 
 
 
[Figure 5 goes here] 
305 
 
 
Slow wave sleep (SWS). Figure 6 conveys the forest plot of the 10 trials in which SWS 
was examined. The pool estimate shows non-significant increase in SWS by PBHWB relative to 
the baseline condition (mean of baseline nights 33.6 min vs. mean of PBHWB nights 40.3 min; 
ES: 0.23; 95% CI=-0.13 to 0.60; P=0.213). The test for heterogeneity fails to reject the null 
310 
hypothesis the studies share a common ES (P=0.279), and the test for publication bias was not 
significant (P=0.057). 
 
[Figure 6 goes here] 
 
315 
Subjective sleep quality. Subjective sleep quality assessed by diverse methods was found to 
be improved by PBHWB interventions in eight trials [54,55,58–60,65,67,68] and unaffected in 
one trial [56]. Meta-analysis of the data of these trials was not feasible due to application of 
greatly disparate methods to quantify sleep quality that varied numerically in scale and range of 
scores.  One study involved an interview method [54], one study Oguri-Shirakawa-Azumi (OSA) 
320 
questionnaire [55], two studies Post Sleep Inventory questionnaire [58,59], two studies Veran 
Snyder Halpern questionnaire [65,68], one study OSA sleep inventory for middle age and aged 
version [60], one study Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index questionnaire [67], and one study 
Consensus sleep diary [56]. 
 
325 
Bias assessment. Table S2 summarizes the appraisal by JBI check list for quasi-
experimental studies of the methods and conduct of each PBHWB investigation. The major 
deficiency of most of them is lack of follow-up assessment. Additional ones are incomplete or

[page 17]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
16 
 
inappropriate statistical methods, i.e., absence of power analysis, effect size, and/or other 
relevant calculations, insufficient information regarding reliability of measurements, and 
330 
inappropriate control group. Studies lacking a control group, before-treatment baseline, and/or 
appropriate detailed description of experimental methods according to the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria (Figure 1) had already been excluded during the screening process. The only 
qualifying RCT was that of Seyyedrasooli et al. [67]. It adhered to all requirements for a RCT, 
except blinding of subjects, examiner, and data analysis personnel. Compliance with the first two 
335 
requirements was impossible due to the nature of the treatment, but noncompliance with the 
latter might have been a source of bias (Table S3). Almost all of the crossover trials randomized 
subjects for order of baseline and treatment procedures; however, less than half of them 
incorporated a wash-out period of one to seven nights between the two experimental conditions. 
The deficiencies of non-randomized order of treatment, absence of non-treatment baseline 
340 
nights, and lack of wash-out period are risks for carry-over bias (Table S3). Finally, the 
investigation of Yang et al. [68] failed to report a reliable measure of the temperature of the 
PHBWB intervention, thereby potentially introducing bias into the interpretation of findings 
(Table S3). 
 
345 
DISCUSSION 
A warm shower or foot or body bath before bedtime is often suggested by medical and 
paramedical professionals to improve sleep [26–28]. The beneficial effect of such interventions 
has been researched in various settings utilizing a variety of measures, ranging from subjective 
self-report questionnaires and objective check lists to wrist actigraphy/home sleep trackers to 
350 
clinical PSG. Many, but not all, of the diverse investigations report significant improvement in

[page 18]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
17 
 
objectively assessed sleep parameters and/or subjectively rated sleep quality and sleep 
parameters. Thus, an aspect of our review of the literature included identification of factors 
associated with successful improvement of sleep by PBHWB treatments. 
Our meta-analyses reveal PBHWB tends to improve SOL, WASO, TST, SWS, and SE; 
355 
although a statistically significant effect was verified only upon SOL and SE. The largest and 
most statistically significant effect was attenuation of SOL, on average by 8.6 min (~36%) from 
that of baseline nights, when applied 1 to 2h before bedtime. A major finding regarding SOL 
across the 17 reviewed studies is the optimal interval of time of 1 to 2h between PBHWB 
intervention and customary bedtime. However, this finding is based upon data of only two 
360 
investigations that entailed a total of 36 subjects -- elderly insomniac subjects with mild to 
moderate vascular dementia whose average age was 77 y in one study [64] and traumatic brain 
injury patients (TBI) whose average age was 36 y in the other study [57]. Nonetheless, the 
findings based on these two studies are seemingly meaningful, since the prevalence of sleep 
disturbances increases with age [69], and it is higher in patients with dementia [70,71] and TBI, 
365 
the prevalence rate being as great as 50%, which is much higher than that of the normal 
population [72,73]. Our findings are consistent with the observations of Kräuchi et al. [74], who 
reported the distal-to-proximal skin temperature gradient (DPG) during the 1.5h period prior to 
lights-off for bedtime is the strongest predictor of SOL. It is also consistent with the proposal by 
the Van Someren group [4,13] it is the heat-loss dissipation induced by PBH-enhanced skin 
370 
blood flow with consequent increase of skin temperature that in large part fosters sleep 
propensity as measured by shortened SOL. 
 DPG, an indicator of distal blood flow and indirect measure of distal heat loss [12], is 
elevated by PBHWB [10,38,63]. Thus, it is not surprising PBHWB treatment of proper temperature

[page 19]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
18 
 
when applied at this optimal circadian time, 1-2h before bedtime, is associated with 
375 
improvement in SOL. When applied too early, 2h or more before bedtime, it may induce feelings 
of sleepiness but it does not significantly shorten SOL. This finding is illustrated by the work of 
Horne and Reid [61], who applied baths of two different water temperatures (41oC and 35.5oC) 
5h or more prior to bedtime. Significant increase in before-bedtime tiredness was observed only 
after the heated bath (41oC), although without significant shortening of SOL by this or the cooler 
380 
35.5oC bath when applied so long before intended nighttime sleep. Overall, these results are in 
line with the observation that warm feet are associated with short SOL [4,12]. Nonetheless, it is 
noteworthy most studies that relied on subjective ratings reported improved sleep quality 
independent of the time before bedtime when PBHWB was applied and whether or not objective 
sleep parameters when also measured were improved [54,55,58–60,65,67,68]. The greater 
385 
subjective satisfaction of sleep associated with PBHWB interventions might be indicative of a 
relaxation, in addition to physiological, effect. For example, a questionnaire survey by Goto et al. 
[32] of 2779 respondents found hot bath treatment associated with attenuated self-perceived 
stress. 
The studies of Kim et al. [75] and Seo and Sohng [76] concerning the effect of a footbath on 
390 
different sleep parameters were excluded from our systematic review and meta-analysis because 
they failed to satisfy inclusion criteria, i.e., they incorporated, in combination with PBHWB, the 
wearing of socks as an additional treatment. Nonetheles, the findings of these studies are relevant 
because they illustrate the role of influential variables on outcomes. Kim et al. [75], who utilized 
a footbath intervention 1.5h before bedtime, failed to detect significant attenuation of SOL. A 
395 
possible explanation could be the donning of socks by subjects immediately following footbath 
heating. Hands and feet are the body’s principal sites of controlled heat exchange [77] due to the

[page 20]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
19 
 
high density of capillary bed and arteriovenous anastomoses (AVAs) of the palms and soles [78]. 
AVAs are vascular shunts that connect arterioles to venules; when vasodilated their diameter can 
enlarge 10-fold more than that of capillaries to shunt a very large volume of blood from core to 
400 
peripheral skin sites [78]. The increased distal blood flow enhances transfer of heat to the hands 
and feet where it can be efficiently dissipated, resulting in rapid core body temperature (CBT) 
decline. PBHWB accomplished by footbath induces AVA vasodilation that under normal 
conditions naturally improves heat loss; however, socks, especially ones of dense fabric, can act 
as an insulating layer at the foot-air boundary and obstruct body heat dissipation. Thus, the 
405 
donning of socks immediately following warm foot bathing in the Kim et al. study [75] could 
explain lack of improvement in SOL. Seo and Sohng [76] also used socks to maintain the 
warmth of the feet of their subjects following warm footbath intervention. However, unlike the 
study of Kim et al. [64],  Seo and Sohng [76] observed significant reduction in SOL relative to 
baseline nights. It is unclear whether the baseline nights of this latter investigation also included 
410 
wearing of socks. The differences in outcomes between the Kim et al. [75] and Seo and Sohng 
[76] trials suggest involvement of socks of varying insulating quality or undisclosed 
methodological or participant-dependent factors.  
Morris et al. [79] observed phase delay of the circadian CBT rhythm of insomniacs compared 
to normal sleepers, resulting in higher CBT at bedtime and later occurrence of CBT nadir during 
415 
sleep than expected. On the other hand, Monroe [80] found poor sleepers have a lower CBT 
compared to good sleepers. These observations suggest the absolute CBT level at bedtime is the 
variable most strongly associated with SOL duration. However, the results of several other 
studies indicate extent of CBT attenuation (∆CBT), rather than actual CBT, achieved before 
bedtime by a warm bath or shower is most strongly associated with shortening of SOL. Mishima 
420

[page 21]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
20 
 
et al. [64], who used a warm bath to the mid-thorax level to increase the CBT to a higher level 
before bedtime on treatment than baseline nights, reported shorter SOL on treatment than 
baseline nights. This implies as a hypothesis amount of the PBHWB-induced lowering of CBT 
before bedtime is a potential mechanism of the significant shortening of SOL we found through 
our statistical analysis of previously published data. The findings of Campbell and Broughton 
425 
[81] are consistent with this hypothesis; they demonstrated association between sleep initiation 
and ∆CBT decline. Jordan et al. [62] scheduled PBHWB 5.75h before lights-off for sleep. CBT 
was significantly higher on treatment nights, even after sleep onset, compared to baseline nights; 
nonetheless, the SOL was unchanged. The graphs shown in this publication indicate the decline 
in CBT consequent to PBHWB occurred primarily during the 2h after its application, i.e., almost 
430 
4h before bedtime. These findings are consistent with the observation that poor compared to 
good sleepers exhibit a smaller ∆CBT just before the commencement of sleep [80,82] and also 
the hypothesis ∆CBT and its rate of change rather than the actual CBT achieved by PBHWB is 
responsible for the shortening of SOL. This hypothesis is consistent with the one proposed 
earlier by the von Someren group [4,13] that heat-loss activation is a causal mechanism of sleep 
435 
propensity and maintenance. In this regard, Gillberg and Akerstedt [83] reported a favorable 
effect of PBHWB on SWS in association with enhanced decline of CBT around the time of sleep 
onset, and Sewitch [84] and Horne and Staff [85] reported favorable effect of PBHWB on 
increased time spent in Stage 4 sleep in association with substantial drop in CBT. 
Some investigators cite the importance of the magnitude of the heat load conveyed by 
440 
PBHWB treatment, which is a function of both its duration and temperature, in affecting sleep. 
Liao et al. [86], who investigated the optimal temperature for footbath interventions, reported 
those of 40o or 41oC significantly increased DPG, even within 10 min of application, but that

[page 22]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
21 
 
only the higher temperature 41oC footbath increased CBT. Horne and Shackell [87] applied 0.5 
and 1.5h warm bath interventions to the mid-thorax level between 20:00 and 22:00h before 
445 
bedtime at 23:45h, finding the longer 1.5h-duration, i.e., higher heat load, treatment relative to 
the baseline condition not only increased SOL but disturbed sleep with multiple awakenings. In 
contrast, the shorter 0.5h duration warm bath, i.e., lower heat load, increased the amount of 
SWS. The findings of this investigation emphasize the potential importance of the total heat load 
delivered by the PBHWB in relation to sleep outcomes. They also highlight the need for further 
450 
investigation to determine the optimal duration and temperature of such interventions.  
This review is based on a thorough search of the most relevant databases for pertinent 
investigations without filter for publication date or language. A total of 17 publications met 
inclusion and exclusion criteria; nonetheless, we are obligated to acknowledge deficiencies in 
their methods and conduct based on JBI checklists established for quasi-experimental, 
455 
randomized control, and prospective cohort studies [40,41]. Common deficiencies are 
incomplete or inappropriate statistical methods – absence of power analysis, effect size, and/or 
other calculations, lack of control group, insufficient information concerning reliability of 
measurements, and no or insufficient follow-up assessment. Moreover, the measured sleep 
parameters of TST, SE, WASO, SOL are interdependent such that changes in one can cause 
460 
change in others. Moreover, there were only two studies entailing objective measurement of SOL 
in which PBHWB commenced and ended 1 to 2h before bedtime. Furthermore, the sample size of 
the diverse investigations varied greatly with only ~35% of them involving more than 20 
participants. Additionally, the subjects of many studies were quite young, even though PBHWB 
methods are more likely to be recommended to elderly insomniacs than middle-age and young 
465 
adults. The average age of participants of five of the 17 studies (~30%) was less than 40 y, and

[page 23]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
22 
 
although ~35% of the reviewed investigations entailed individuals older than 60-65 y of age, 
only three pertained specifically to elderly insomniacs. Finally, there was marked difference 
among the 17 studies as to the means of PBHWB exposure, water temperature, timing, and 
duration. In spite of the many differences between the reviewed investigations, the collective 
470 
findings implicate the potential worthiness of PBHWB treatment of optimal temperature and 
timing as a simple and low-cost nonpharmacological means of managing sleep-onset insomnia 
and improving overall sleep quality. Nonetheless, long-term, large sample-sized trials, 
particularly entailing elderly persons and chronic disease patients who experience difficulty 
falling asleep and who may be differentially responsive to PBHWB strategies [4], are 
475 
recommended to properly assess their merit and limitations. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Our systematic review of the literature supports the conclusion nightly warm showering, foot 
bathing, or full body bathing scheduled 1-2h before bedtime for a duration as short as 10 mins 
480 
can improve sleep, especially shortening of SOL, most likely by enhancing decrement in CBT 
before bedtime. Our conclusion regarding the proper scheduling of PBHWB before bedtime, 
however, is based on the findings of only two studies entailing in total 36 subjects, thereby 
highlighting the need for more extensive investigation. The investigations reviewed herein 
reconfirm association between PBHWB-induced warming of the palms and soles and shortening 
485 
of SOL. Additionally, a small number of PBHWB trials indicates achieved ∆CBT around bedtime 
is more important than achieved absolute CBT in determining the beneficial effect on SOL and 
perhaps other sleep parameters, such SWS and SE. Future research is required to confirm the 
optimal circadian stage/interval of time before bedtime; duration, temperature, means (footbath

[page 24]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
23 
 
or other) of PBHWB treatment. Future investigation is also required to assess the impact upon 
490 
PBHWB outcomes exerted by influential factors and conditions that may affect outcomes, such as 
after-intervention donning of socks and attributes of sleep ware. Study is also encouraged to 
determine the types of sleep complaints as well as medical and demographic characteristics of 
those most likely to benefit from PBHWB intervention. 
 
495 
 
Conflict of interest 
The authors have no conflicts of interest that influence the content of this review.

[page 25]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
24 
 
Practice Points 
• Warming of hands and feet achieved by warm shower or foot or body baths for a 
duration as short as 10 min scheduled 1-2 hours before bedtime is associated with 
shortened sleep onset latency and increased sleep efficiency. 
• Warm shower or foot or body baths can enhance subjective sleep quality, perhaps not 
only through shortened sleep onset latency and increased sleep efficiency, but through 
increased slow wave sleep and improvement of other sleep parameters, such as wake 
after sleep onset and total sleep time. 
• Passive body heating effects on sleep readiness and sleep onset latency seem to be 
most strongly associated with achieved extent of decline in core body temperature 
rather than achieved level of core body temperature. 
 
 
 
 
500

[page 26]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
25 
 
 
Research Agenda 
• Clarify physiological mechanisms -- level, amount, and rate of change of core body 
temperature -- of improvements in sleep parameters and quality attributed to water-
based passive body heating. 
•  Confirm the optimal timing, duration, temperature, and total heat load of water-based 
passive body heating interventions. 
• Determine the effect of sleep ware and socks on the therapeutic impact of water-based 
passive body heating interventions.   
• Determine the spectrum of sleep disorders for which water-based passive body heating 
is beneficial and factors of individuals that affect outcomes.    
• Conduct long-term, large sample trials entailing elderly and chronic-diseased 
individuals with complaint of sleep dissatisfaction.

[page 27]
MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
26 
 
References 
[1] 
Feinstein EL. Bathing in the Hebrew Bible. 
https://www.bibleodyssey.org/en/people/related-articles/bathing-in-the-hebrew-bible 
505 
(accessed August 20, 2018). 
[2] 
van Tubergen A, van der Linden S. A brief history of spa therapy. Ann Rheum Dis 
2002;61:273–5. 
[3] 
Gunn JC. Gunn’s domestic medicine. Philadelphia: G. V. Raymond; 1840. 
*[4] Raymann RJEM, Swaab DF, Van Someren EJW. Skin temperature and sleep-onset 
510 
latency: changes with age and insomnia. Physiol Behav 2007;90:257–66. 
doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2006.09.008. 
[5] 
Huffman C. “Alcmaeon”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017). 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/alcmaeon/. 
[6] 
Finkbeiner AK. Getting through the sleep gate. The Sciences 1998;38:14–8. 
515 
doi:10.1002/j.2326-1951.1998.tb03657.x. 
[7] 
Jürgensen T. Die Körperwärme des gesunden Menschen: Studien. FCW Vogel; 1873.  
[8] 
Davy J. On the temperature of man. Philos Trans R Soc London 1845;135:319–33. 
doi:10.1098/rstl.1845.0014. 
[9] 
Dalton JC. Treatise on human physiology. Philadelphia: Henry C. Lea; 1875. 
520 
*[10] Raymann RJEM, Swaab DF, Van Someran EJW. Cutaneous warming promotes sleep 
onset. Am J Physiol Integr Comp Physiol 2005;288:R1589–97. 
doi:10.1152/ajpregu.00492.2004. 
*[11] Van Someren EJW. Mechanisms and functions of coupling between sleep and temperature 
rhythms. Prog Brain Res 2006;153:309–24. doi:10.1016/S0079-6123(06)53018-3.  
525