

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Biofortification of
staple crops
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Fortification is the practice of deliberately increasing the content of an essential
micronutrient, i.e. vitamins and minerals (including trace elements) in a food, so as to
improve the nutritional quality of the food supply and provide a public health benefit
with minimal risk to health.
Biofortification is the process by which the nutritional quality of food crops is improved
through agronomic practices, conventional plant breeding, or modern biotechnology.
Biofortification differs from conventional fortification in that biofortification aims to
increase nutrient levels in crops during plant growth rather than through manual
means during processing of the crops. Biofortification may therefore present a way to

[page 2]
iron-biofortification of rice, beans, sweet potato, cassava and legumes;
zinc-biofortification of wheat, rice, beans, sweet potato and maize;
provitamin A carotenoid-biofortification of sweet potato, maize and cassava; and
amino acid and protein-biofortification of sourghum and cassava.
reach populations where supplementation and conventional fortification activities may
be difficult to implement and/or limited.
Examples of biofortification projects include:
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Staple crops biofortified with increased micronutrient content: effects on vitamin and mineral
status, as well as health and cognitive function in the general population (protocol)
Garcia-Casal MN, Peña-Rosas JP, Pachón H, De-Regil LM, Centeno Tablante E, Flores-Urrutia MC. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 8. Art. No.: CD012311.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
How Cost-Effective is Biofortification in Combating Micronutrient Malnutrition? An Ex ante
Assessment
JMeenakshi JV, Johnson NL, Manyong VM, DeGroote H, Javelosa J, Yanggen DR, et al.World Development.
2010; 38(1):64-75.

[page 3]
Cost-Effectiveness of Golden Mustard for Treating Vitamin A Deficiency in India
Chow J, Klein EY, Laxminarayan R.PLoS One. 2010; 5(8):e12046.
Potential impact and cost-effectiveness of multi-biofortified rice in China
De Steur H, Gellynck X, Blancquaert D, Lambert W, Van Der Straeten D, Qaim M. N Biotechnol. 2012;
29(3):432-42.
Plant breeding to control zinc deficiency in India: how cost-effective is biofortification?
Stein AJ, Nestel P, Meenakshi JV, Qaim M, Sachdev HP, Bhutta ZA. Public Health Nutr. 2007; 10(5):492-501.
Available evidence is limited and
systematic reviews have not yet been
conducted
Learn More 
Biofortification of crops with
minerals and vitamins
Category 3 intervention
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 4]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO