

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Breastfeeding of low-
birth-weight infants
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Every year, more than 20 million infants are born weighing less than 2.5kg – over 96% of
them in developing countries. These low-birth-weight (LBW) infants are at increased risk
of early growth retardation, infectious disease, developmental delay and death during
infancy and childhood.
Most LBW is a consequence of preterm birth, small size for gestational age, or both.
Interventions to improve the feeding of LBW infants are likely to improve the immediate
and longer-term health and well-being of the individual infant and have a significant
impact on neonatal and infant mortality levels in the population.

[page 2]
Breastfeeding has many health benefits for both the mother and infant. Breast milk
contains all the nutrients an infant needs in the first six months of life. Breastfeeding
further protects against diarrhoea and common childhood illnesses such as
pneumonia, and may also have longer-term health benefits for the mother and child,
such as reducing the risk of overweight and obesity in childhood and adolescence.
Evidence suggests that initiation of breastfeeding in the first day of life is associated
with a significant reduction in the risk of neonatal mortality when compared with
delaying breastfeeding for more than 24 hours after birth.
WHO Recommendations
LBW infants who are able to breastfeed should be put to the breast as soon as possible
after birth when they are clinically stable, and should be exclusively breastfed until six
months of age.
This recommendation does not address sick LBW infants or infants with birth
weight less than 1.0 kg.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidelines on optimal feeding of low birth-weight infants in low- and
middle-income countries
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Optimal feeding of low-birth-weight infants: technical review
Edmond K, Rajiv B. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006.

[page 3]
Related Cochrane reviews
Avoidance of bottles during the establishment of breast feeds in preterm infants
Collins CT, Gillis J, McPhee AJ, Suganuma H, Makrides M.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016,
Issue 10. Art. No.: CD005252.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Donor breast milk versus infant formula for preterm infants: systematic review and meta-
analysis
Boyd CA, Quigley MA, Brocklehurst P. Archives of Disease in Childhood: Fetal and Neonatal Edition. 2007;
92:F169–F175.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Economic evaluation of enhanced staff contact for the promotion of breastfeeding for low
birth weight infants
Rice SJ, Craig D, McCormick F, Renfrew MJ, Williams AF. Int J Technol Assess Health Care. 2010; 26(2):133-40.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions

[page 4]
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO