

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Breastfeeding
education for increased
breastfeeding duration
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Breastfeeding has many health benefits for both the mother and infant. Breast milk
contains all the nutrients an infant needs in the first six months of life.
Breastfeeding protects against diarrhoea and common childhood illnesses such as
pneumonia, and may also have longer-term health benefits for the mother and child,
such as reducing the risk of overweight and obesity in childhood and adolescence.
WHO recommends that infants should be exclusively breastfed for the first six months
of life to achieve optimal growth, development and health. Thereafter, to meet their
evolving nutritional requirements, infants should receive nutritionally adequate and

[page 2]
safe complementary foods, while continuing to breastfeed for up to two years or
beyond.
Evidence suggests that educational interventions during pregnancy (e.g. peer
counselling, lactation consultation or formal breastfeeding education) may increase the
duration of breastfeeding.
WHO Recommendations
Where facilities provide antenatal care, pregnant women and their families should be
counselled about the benefits and management of breastfeeding.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding in
facilities providing maternity and newborn services
Implementation guidance: protecting, promoting, and supporting
breastfeeding in facilities providing maternity and newborn services:
the revised Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative 2018
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Antenatal breastfeeding education for increasing breastfeeding duration

[page 3]
Lumbiganon P, Martis R, Laopaiboon M, Festin MR, Ho JJ, Hakimi M. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2016; Issue 12. Art. No.: CD006425.
Summary of this review 
Interventions for promoting the initiation of breastfeeding
Balogun OO, O’Sullivan EJ, McFadden A, Ota E, Gavine A, Garner CD et al. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 11. Art. No.: CD001688.
Other related systematic reviews
Breastfeeding Peer Counseling: From Efficacy through Scale-up
Chapman DJ, Morel K, Anderson AK, Damio G, Pérez-Escamilla R. Journal of Human Lactation. 2010;
26(3):314–326.
Breastfeeding promotion interventions and breastfeeding practices: a systematic review
Haroon S, Das JK, Salam RA, Imdad A, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2013; 13(Suppl 3):S20.
Interventions to improve breastfeeding outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Sinha B, Chowdhury R, Sankar MJ, Martines J, Taneja S, Mazumder S, et al. Acta Paediatrica. 2015;
104:114–134.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Scaling-up exclusive breastfeeding support programmes: the example of KwaZulu-Natal
Desmond C, Bland RM, Boyce G, Coovadia HM, Coutsoudis A, Rollins N, Newell ML. PLoS One. 2008;
3(6):e2454.
Potential economic impacts from improving breastfeeding rates in the UK
Pokhrel S, Quigley MA, Fox-Rushby J, McCormick F, Williams A, Trueman P, et al. Arch Dis Child. 2015;
100(4):334-40.
Cost-effectiveness of peer counselling for the promotion of exclusive breastfeeding in Uganda
Chola L, Fadnes LT, Engebretsen IM, Nkonki L, Nankabirwa V, Sommerfelt H, et al. PLoS One. 2015;
10(11):e0142718.

[page 4]
Cost effectiveness analysis of strategies for child health in developing countries
Edejer TT, Aikins M, Black R, Wolfson L, Hutubessy R, Evans DB. BMJ. 2005; 331(7526):1177.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is an Essential
Nutrition Action targeting the first 1000
days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 5]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO