

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Calcium
supplementation
before pregnancy for
the prevention of pre-
eclampsia and its
complications
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Hypertensive disorders* such as pre-eclampsia and eclampsia are among the main
causes of maternal deaths and preterm births, especially in low-income countries.
Preterm births are the leading cause of early neonatal deaths and infant mortality, and
survivors are at higher risk of respiratory disease and long-term neurological morbidity.

[page 2]
Normally, during early pregnancy, blood pressure falls and then slowly rises until the
end of pregnancy. However, obesity, diabetes, twin or teenage pregnancies and low
calcium consumption alter this equilibrium and increase the risk of developing pre-
eclampsia.
While calcium supplementation during pregnancy reduces the risk of hypertensive
disorders during pregnancy, effects of supplementation before and/or early in
pregnancy are less clear.
*disorders in which blood pressure is elevated
WHO Recommendations
Pre-pregnancy calcium supplementation for the prevention of pre-eclampsia and its
complications is recommended only in the context of rigorous research.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendation on calcium supplementation before pregnancy
for the prevention of pre-eclampsia and its complications
WHO recommendation: Calcium supplementation during pregnancy for
prevention of pre-eclampsia and its complications
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy
experience
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Calcium supplementation commencing before or early in pregnancy, for preventing
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy
Hofmeyr GJ, Manyame S, Medley N, Williams MJ. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019; Issue 9.
Art. No.: CD011192.
Related Cochrane reviews
Calcium supplementation (other than for preventing or treating hypertension) for improving
pregnancy and infant outcomes
Buppasiri P, Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J, Ngamjarus C, Laopaiboon M, Medley N. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2015; Issue 2. Art. No.: CD007079.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Effects of Calcium Supplementation During Pregnancy on Maternal, Fetal and Birth Outcomes
Imdad A and Bhutta ZA. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology. 2012; 26 Suppl 1:138–152.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Should women be advised to use calcium supplements during pregnancy? A decision analysis
Meertens LJE, Scheepers HCJ, Willemse JPMM, Spaanderman MEA, Smits LJM. Matern Child Nutr. 2018;
14(1).
Optimizing treatment for the prevention of pre-eclampsia/eclampsia in Nepal: is calcium
supplementation during pregnancy cost-effective?
Feldhaus I, LeFevre AE, Rai C, Bhattarai J, Russo D, Rawlins B, et al. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2016; 14:13.
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO