

[page 1]
Clinical Overview of Chickenpox (Varicella)
KEY POINTS
Varicella (chickenpox) is an acute infectious disease caused by varicella-zoster virus
(VZV).
The most common chickenpox complications are bacterial infections of the skin and soft
tissues in children and pneumonia in adults.
The most effective prevention for varicella is chickenpox vaccination.
Cause
Varicella is highly caused by varicella-zoster virus (VZV), which is a DNA virus that is a member of the herpesvirus group. Primary infection with
VZV causes varicella. After the primary infection, VZV stays in the body (in the sensory nerve ganglia) as a latent infection. Reactivation of latent
infection causes herpes zoster (shingles).
KEEP READING
Clinical Overview of Shingles (Herpes Zoster)
Who is at risk
People at risk for severe varicella include:
Immunocompromised people without evidence of immunity to varicella.
Pregnant women without evidence of immunity to varicella.
Newborns whose mothers have varicella from 5 days before to 2 days after delivery.
Premature babies exposed to varicella or herpes zoster.
KEEP READING
Clinical Guidance for People at Risk for Severe Varicella
Incubation period
The average incubation period for varicella is 14 to 16 days after exposure to a varicella or a herpes zoster rash. It takes from 10 to 21 days after
exposure to the virus for someone to develop varicella.
How it spreads
Varicella is highly contagious
Varicella is more contagious than mumps and rubella and less contagious than measles.

JULY 15, 2024
For Health Care Providers
Chickenpox (Varicella)

[page 2]
The virus can be spread from person to person by direct contact, inhalation of aerosols from vesicular fluid of skin lesions of acute varicella or
zoster; and possibly through infected respiratory secretions that also may be aerosolized.
A person with varicella is considered contagious beginning 1 to 2 days before rash onset until all the chickenpox lesions have crusted.
Vaccinated people may develop lesions that do not crust. These people are considered contagious until no new lesions have appeared for 24
hours.
Based on studies of transmission among household members, about 90% of susceptible close contacts will get varicella after exposure to a
person with disease.
Although limited data are available to assess the risk of VZV transmission from zoster, one household study
 found that the risk for VZV
transmission from herpes zoster was approximately 20% of the risk for transmission from varicella.
Breakthrough varicella is also contagious. One study
 of varicella transmission in household settings found that people with mild
breakthrough varicella (<50 lesions), who were vaccinated with one dose of varicella vaccine, were one-third as contagious as unvaccinated
people with varicella. However, people with breakthrough varicella with 50 or more lesions were just as contagious as unvaccinated people with
the disease.
Disease rates
Prior to vaccine introduction:
Varicella used to be very common in the United States and contributed significantly to the burden of childhood disease. In the early 1990s each
year:
More than 4 million people got varicella
10,500 to 13,500 were hospitalized
100 to 150 died
More than 90% of cases, 70% of hospitalizations, and about half of the deaths occurred in children.
To see post-vaccine era disease rates, read about the impact of the U.S. varicella vaccination program.
Clinical features
A mild prodrome of fever and malaise may occur 1 to 2 days before rash onset, particularly in adults. In children, the rash is often the first sign of
disease.
In unvaccinated people, varicella progresses rapidly from macular to papular to vesicular lesions before crusting.
The most common chickenpox complications are bacterial infections of the skin and soft tissues in children and pneumonia in adults.
Breakthrough varicella occurs less frequently among those who have received 2 doses of vaccine; compared with those who have received only
1 dose.
KEEP READING
Detailed Clinical Signs and Symptoms of Varicella
Photos of Chickenpox
View photo examples of chickenpox rash on the human body.
APR. 24, 2024
People with breakthrough varicella are also contagious.
[1]
[2]

[page 3]
Breakthrough Varicella Fact Sheet
Learn what breakthrough varicella (chickenpox) looks like in
vaccinated people.
Download
APR. 24, 2024
Prevention
CDC recommends 2 doses of varicella vaccine for all children, adolescents, and adults without evidence of immunity to varicella. Those
who previously received one dose of varicella vaccine should receive their second dose for best protection against the disease.
KEEP READING
Chickenpox Vaccine Recommendations
Nosocomial transmission of VZV is well-recognized and can be life-threatening to certain groups of patients. Reports of nosocomial
transmission are uncommon in the United States since the introduction of varicella vaccine.
Patients, healthcare providers, and visitors with varicella or herpes zoster can spread VZV to susceptible patients and healthcare providers
in hospitals, long-term care facilities, and other healthcare settings. In healthcare settings, transmissions have been attributed to delays in
the diagnosis or reporting of varicella and herpes zoster and failures to implement control measures promptly.
Although all susceptible patients in healthcare settings are at risk for severe varicella and complications, certain patients without evidence
of immunity are at increased risk.
KEEP READING
Preventing VZV Transmission in Healthcare Settings
Testing and diagnosis
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) laboratory testing information applies to testing and diagnosis of primary VZV infection (varicella) and reactivation
(herpes zoster). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is the most helpful laboratory test for confirming cases of varicella. PCR can detect VZV DNA
rapidly.
Laboratory Testing for Varicella-Zoster Virus (VZV)
Learn about lab testing for varicella-zoster virus, the cause of chickenpox and shingles.
Specimen Collection for Varicella-Zoster Virus (VZV) Testing
Learn about collecting and shipping specimens for VZV testing, and sources for suitable supplies.
Recommendations for Testing Measles, Mumps, Rubella, and Varicella
PDF
Download
Expand All

Chickenpox vaccination

Prevention in healthcare settings


[page 4]
A visual tool summarizing available test types and when to collect specimens.
Patient management
Isolation
Healthcare providers should follow standard precautions, airborne precautions (negative air-flow rooms), and contact precautions until lesions
are dry and crusted. If negative air-flow rooms are not available, patients with varicella should be isolated in closed rooms. They should have no
contact with people without evidence of immunity. Patients with varicella should be cared for by staff with evidence of immunity.
KEEP READING
Preventing VZV Transmission in Healthcare Settings
Impact of U.S. varicella vaccination program
The varicella vaccination program has dramatically decreased virus circulation and increased community protection.
Varicella hospitalizations and deaths declined 94% and 97%, respectively, among people 50 years old and younger.
Routine testing after 2 doses is not recommended
Routine testing for varicella immunity after 2 doses of vaccine is not recommended. Available commercial assays are not sensitive enough
to detect antibodies after vaccination in all instances. Documented receipt of 2 doses of varicella vaccine supersedes results of subsequent
serologic testing.

The vaccine program has reduced chickenpox cases by 97% since 1995.
25 years of the program
‎Summarizing the first 25 years of the vaccination program, CDC and its collaborators published 14 manuscripts in a special supplement in
the Journal of Infectious Diseases—highlighting the success of this important vaccine.
Read articles 

Expand All

Main Findings from 1995-2019


[page 5]
The greatest decline in cases was among people 20 years old and younger who were born during the program, with 97% drop in
hospitalizations and more than 99% drop in deaths.
The risk of shingles is significantly lower among vaccinated children, including those who are immunocompromised.
There is about an 80% lower risk of shingles among healthy vaccinated children compared to unvaccinated children who had wild-type
varicella.
Disease prevented and dollar saved
During the first 25 years, the U.S varicella vaccination program saved 118,000 life-years, at net societal savings of $23.4 billion and
prevented an estimated:
91 million cases
238,000 hospitalizations
1.1 million hospitalization days
2,000 deaths
For every $1 spent, the estimated return on investment is $1.70; however, the benefits of the investment will continue to accrue beyond
2020.
Case definitions
Varicella Reporting and Surveillance
Learn about varicella case reporting and definitions, deaths, and other surveillance resources.
Varicella Outbreak Identification, Investigation, & Control
Learn how CDC works with state health departments to monitor varicella outbreaks.
Resources
Varicella | Surveillance of Vaccine-Preventable Diseases Manual
ACIP Recommendations for Varicella Prevention | MMWR
Talking with Parents about Vaccines
Red Book 2018: Varicella-Zoster Virus Infections 
Pink Book: Varicella
SOURCES
REFERENCES
1. Seiler HE. A study of herpes zoster particularly in its relationship to chickenpox. Journal of Hygiene. 1949;47(3):253-262.
doi:10.1017/S002217240001456X .
2. Seward JF, Zhang JX, Maupin TJ, Mascola L, Jumaan AO. Contagiousness of varicella in vaccinated cases: a household contact study. JAMA.
2004 Aug 11;292(6):704-8. doi: 10.1001/jama.292.6.704 . PMID: 15304467.
CONTENT SOURCE:
National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases; Division of Viral Diseases