

[page 1]
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Guidance for the Clinician in Rendering Pediatric Care
Clinical Practice Guideline for the
Evaluation and Treatment of Children
and Adolescents With Obesity
Sarah E. Hampl, MD, FAAP,a Sandra G. Hassink, MD, FAAP,b Asheley C. Skinner, PhD,c Sarah C. Armstrong, MD, FAAP,d
Sarah E. Barlow, MD, MPH, FAAP,e Christopher F. Bolling, MD, FAAP,f Kimberly C. Avila Edwards, MD, FAAP,g
Ihuoma Eneli, MD, MS, FAAP,h Robin Hamre, MPH,i Madeline M. Joseph, MD, FAAP,j Doug Lunsford, MEd,k
Eneida Mendonca, MD, PhD, FAAP,l Marc P. Michalsky, MD, MBA, FAAP,m Nazrat Mirza, MD, ScD, FAAP,n
Eduardo R. Ochoa, Jr, MD, FAAP,o Mona Sharifi, MD, MPH, FAAP,p Amanda E. Staiano, PhD, MPP,q
Ashley E. Weedn, MD, MPH, FAAP,r Susan K. Flinn, MA,s Jeanne Lindros, MPH,t Kymika Okechukwu, MPAu
Greetings
You have in your hands, or at your fingertips, the first edition of the
American Academy of Pediatrics clinical practice guideline for evaluation and
management of children and adolescents with overweight and obesity.
Putting together this guideline was no small task, and the Academy is
grateful to the efforts of all the professionals who contributed to the
production of this document. This work is a true testament to their passion
and dedication to combatting childhood and adolescent overweight and
obesity.
The Subcommittee responsible for developing this guideline comprises a
diverse group of professionals from a variety of disciplines representing both
governmental entities and private institutions. Experts all, they are united by
a common desire to provide the finest, most effective care and treatment to
children and adolescents with overweight and obesity. Over the course of
several months, the members of the Subcommittee reviewed the technical
reports produced from the study review, then worked in concert to develop
the Key Action Statements and Expert Consensus Recommendations
contained within this guideline. These were crafted with meticulous care by
the Subcommittee members, to align with current literature and to place
appropriate emphasis on each statement.
While representing such a broad spectrum of perspectives, the members of
this committee are all keenly aware of the multitude of barriers to treatment
that patients and their families face. These barriers impact not only their
access to treatment, but their ability to follow prescribed treatment plans.
Whereas some patients are able to adopt the lifestyle changes and
habitualize elements of their prescribed treatment plans, so many others
struggle to do so for a wide variety of reasons. The members of the
Subcommittee understand all of this. To assist with optimizing health equity
and overcoming these barriers, guidance on a number of multilevel factors
related to barriers to treatment have been included in this guideline. During
the course of their work, members of the Subcommittee acknowledged that,
although so much has been learned to advance the treatment of children and
adolescents with overweight and obesity, there is still so much we have yet
aChildren’s Mercy Kansas City Center for Children’s Healthy Lifestyles &
Nutrition, University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine, Kansas
City, Missouri; bMedical Director, American Academy of Pediatrics,
Institute for Healthy Childhood Weight, Wilmington, Delaware;
cDepartment of Population Health Sciences, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina; dDepartments of Pediatrics and
Population Health Sciences, Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina; eDepartment of Pediatrics, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Children’s Medical Center of Dallas,
Dallas, Texas; fDepartment of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio; gChildren’s Health Policy & Advocacy, Ascension;
Department of Pediatrics, Dell Medical School at The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, Texas; hDepartment of Pediatrics, The Ohio State
University, Center for Healthy Weight and Nutrition, Nationwide
Children’s Hospital, Columbus, Ohio; iCenters for Disease Control and
Prevention; Atlanta, Georgia; jDivision of Pediatric Emergency Medicine,
Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Florida College of
Medicine–Jacksonville, University of Florida Health Sciences
Center–Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida; kFamily Representative;
lDepartments of Pediatrics and Biostatistics & Health Data Science,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana;
mDepartment of Pediatric Surgery, The Ohio State University, College of Medicine,
Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, Ohio; nChildren’s National Hospital,
George Washington University, Washington, DC; oDepartment of
Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Arkansas
Children’s Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas; pDepartment of Pediatrics,
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; qLouisiana State
University Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana; rDepartment of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; sMedical Writer/Consultant,
Washington, DC; tAmerican Academy of Pediatrics, Itasca, Illinois; and
uAmerican Academy of Pediatrics, Itasca, Illinois
This document is copyrighted and is property of the American
Academy of Pediatrics and its Board of Directors. All authors have
To cite: Hampl SE, Hassink SG, Skinner AC, et al. Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Treatment of
Children and Adolescents With Obesity. Pediatrics. 2023;151(2):
e2022060640
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023:e2022060640
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 2]
to discover. The Subcommittee recognizes the importance that future studies
will play in advancing our knowledge and understanding of this chronic
disease, knowledge and understanding that will lead to the development of
new and more effective treatments. Specific discussion about the needs for
future research are included in the guideline.
It is the fervent hope of every member of the Subcommittee that this
guideline and the resources that accompany it will provide you with a more
complete understanding of the issues, factors, and needs of patients
combating overweight and obesity, as well as successful treatment options to
assist them in their battle. This guideline and the resources that accompany
it are not only for you, they are because of you, and all that you do to care
for each and every patient as if they were the most important one. Because,
as we all know, they are.
Be well,
Doug Lunsford, Family Representative
I. INTRODUCTION
The current and long-term health of
14.4 million children and
adolescents is affected by obesity,1,2
making it one of the most common
pediatric chronic diseases.3–5 Long
stigmatized as a reversible
consequence of personal choices,
obesity has complex genetic,
physiologic, socioeconomic, and
environmental contributors. As the
environment has become
increasingly obesogenic, access to
evidence-based treatment has
become even more crucial.
A significant milestone in the fight to
counter misperceptions about obesity
and its causes occurred in 1998, when
the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
designated obesity as a chronic
disease. The NIH made a further
commitment to necessary research in
the “Strategic Plan for NIH Obesity
Research,” released by the NIH Obesity
Task Force in 2011.6 In 2013, on the
basis of accumulating evidence, the
American Medical Association
recognized obesity as a complex,
chronic disease that requires medical
attention.7
The scientific and medical
community’s understanding of
obesity is constantly evolving.
Increased understanding of the
impact of social determinants of
health (SDoHs, see Definition of
Terms section) on the chronic
disease of obesity—along with
heightened appreciation of the
impact of the chronicity and severity
of obesity comorbidities—has
enabled broader and deeper
understanding of the complexity of
both obesity risk and treatment.8,9
Multiple randomized controlled
trials and comparative effectiveness
studies have yielded effective
treatment strategies, demonstrating
that, despite the complex nature of
this disease, obesity treatment can
be successful.10,11
The knowledge and skills to treat
childhood obesity have become
necessities for clinical teams in
pediatric primary and subspecialty
care. For more than 2 decades, the
American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP) and its members have had the
opportunity to collaborate with
multiple scientific and professional
organizations to improve the clinical
care of children with overweight
and obesity. Notable milestones
include the 1998 “Expert
Committee Recommendations,”12
the 2007 “Expert Committee
Recommendations,”13–15 the
creation of the AAP Section on
Obesity and founding of the Institute
for Healthy Childhood Weight, both
in 2013; and the Institute’s
“Algorithm for the Assessment and
Management of Childhood Obesity”
in 2016.16
This is the AAP’s first clinical
practice guideline (CPG) outlining
evidence-based evaluation and
treatment of children and
adolescents with overweight and
obesity.
This guideline does not cover the
prevention of obesity, which will be
addressed in a forthcoming AAP
policy statement.
The CPG also does not include
guidance for overweight and obesity
evaluation and treatment of children
younger than 2 years. Children
under the age of 2 were not part of
the inclusion criteria for the
evidence review, because it is
difficult to practically define and
measure excess adiposity in this age
group. The CPG also does not
discuss primary obesity prevention,
as no studies reporting results of
obesity prevention interventions
met the inclusion criteria for the
evidence review.
Nonetheless, the topics of obesity
prevention and evaluation and
treatment of children younger than
2 years are very important to
reduce this threat to children’s
2
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 3]
current and future health. Future
CPGs may include these topics; in
the meantime, information that may
assist pediatricians and other
pediatric health care providers
(PHCPs) is included on the AAP
Institution for Healthy Childhood
Weight’s Web site (aap.org/
obesitycpg). Further information on
the CPG’s methodology and the
writing committee’s approach is
covered in subsequent sections.
The CPG contains Key Action
Statements (KASs), recommendations
based on evidence from randomized
controlled and comparative
effectiveness trials as well as
high-quality longitudinal and
epidemiologic studies. The CPG
writing Subcommittee uses the term
“pediatricians and other pediatric
health care providers” to include
both pediatric primary and specialty
care physicians and other medical
providers as well as allied health
care professionals, since all will
encounter and can intervene with
children with overweight, obesity,
and obesity-related comorbidities. An
algorithm with these KASs is
provided in Appendix 1.
The KASs are supplemented by
Consensus Recommendations that
are based on expert opinion and
address issues that were not part of
the supporting technical reports
(TRs). These consensus
recommendations are supported by
AAP-endorsed guidelines, clinical
guidelines, and/or position
statements from professional
societies in the field and an
extensive literature review.
This CPG stands on the shoulders of
the pediatricians, other PHCPs,
clinical researchers, and other
stakeholders who collaborated to
create the previous Expert
Recommendations, which have been
valued sources of guidance for
health care professionals, clinical
systems, parents, and other key
stakeholders. It is our hope that this
CPG will further advance the
equitable care of children and
adolescents with this chronic
disease.
II. APPROACH
Childhood obesity results from a
multifactorial set of socioecological,
environmental, and genetic
influences that act on children and
families. Individuals exposed to
adversity can have alterations in
immunologic, metabolic, and
epigenetic processes that increase
risk for obesity by altering energy
regulation.17–19 These influences
tend to be more prevalent among
children who have experienced
negative environmental and SDoHs,
such as racism.20 Overweight and
obesity are more common in
children who live in poverty,21,22
children who live in underresourced
communities,23 in families that have
immigrated,24 or in children who
experience discrimination or
stigma.25–32 As such, obesity does
not affect all population groups
equally.33 This fact highlights the
importance of understanding the
role of SDoHs34 as well as the social
context of children and their
families in the etiology and
treatment of overweight and
obesity.
Children with overweight and
obesity benefit from health behavior
and lifestyle treatment, which is a
child-focused, family-centered,
coordinated approach to care,
coordinated by a patient-centered
medical home, and may involve
pediatricians, other pediatric health
care providers (such as registered
dietitian nutritionists [RDNs],
psychologists, nurses, exercise
specialists, and social workers),
families, schools, communities, and
health policy.35 Obesity is long-
lasting and has persistent and
negative health effects, attributable
morbidity and mortality, and social
and economic consequences that can
impact a child’s quality of life.36–39
Because obesity is a chronic disease
with escalating effects over time, a
life course approach to identification
and treatment should begin as
early as possible and continue
longitudinally through childhood,
adolescence, and young adulthood,
with transition into adult
care.36,39–41
A. Health Equity Considerations
It is not uncommon for the
differences in disease prevalence and
outcomes among population groups
to be described in terms of ethnicity,
race, gender, and/or age and for
these differences to be referred to as
“disparities.”42 Disparity, however,
only defines differences between
groups without referring to inequities
that cause these differences among
populations (ie, “economic, civil-
political, cultural, or environmental
conditions that are required to
generate parity and equality”42).
Precisely because of the intertwining
of inequities throughout the life
course, health disparities can be
found from maternal pregnancy
outcomes through adolescence and,
as such, can have an inevitable
impact on childhood obesity.
This distinction between health
disparities and inequities is
particularly important when
considering chronic disease,
because: (1) obesity risk factors are
embedded in the socioecological and
environmental fabric of children’s
lives; and (2) there is a danger of
stigmatizing children with obesity
and their families on the basis of
race and ethnicity, age, and gender
based on the disparities of
outcome—with failure to recognize
the systemic challenges that cause
and maintain inequities.43,44
Inequities are often associated with
each other45 and result in
disparities in obesity risk and
outcomes across the socioecological
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
3
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 4]
spectrum. Importantly, they
represent neighborhood-,
community-, and population-level
factors that can be changed.46
Inequities that promote obesity in
childhood can have a longitudinal
effect leading to disparities in adult
health and contributing to adult
obesity and chronic disease.47
The AAP is dedicated to reducing
health disparities and increasing
health equity for all children and
adolescents.28 Attainment of these
goals requires addressing inequities
in available resources and systemic
barriers to quality health care
services for children with obesity.48
To that end, “practice standards
must evolve to support an equity-
based practice paradigm” and
payment strategies must promote
this approach to care.28
It is our hope that individual clinical
encounters with patients and families
will provide opportunities to “screen
and address the social, economic,
educational, environmental, and
personal-capital needs of the children
with obesity and their families.”49 In
addition, understanding the wider
determinants of the chronic disease
of obesity will enable pediatricians
and other PHCPs to “raise awareness
of the relevance of these social and
environmental determinants of
childhood obesity in their
communities.”49
B. Racism
Racism as an SDoH has been defined
as a “system of structuring
opportunity and assigning value
based on the social interpretation of
how one looks (race) that unfairly
disadvantages some individuals and
communities (and) unfairly
advantages other individuals and
communities …”50,51 that “impacts the
health status of children, adolescents,
emerging adults and their families.”52
Inequalities in poverty,
unemployment, and homeownership
attributable to structural racism have
been linked to increased obesity
rates.53 Racism experienced in
everyday life has also been associated
with increased obesity prevalence.54
Youth with overweight and obesity
have been found to be at increased
risk not only for weight-based
harassment but also for sexual
harassment and harassment based on
race and ethnicity, socioeconomic
status (SES), and gender.55 In adults,
studies have found positive
associations between self-reported
discrimination and waist
circumference,56,57 visceral
adiposity,58 and BMI57 in both non-
Latino and Latino populations.59
C. Weight Bias and Stigma
Considerations
Individuals with overweight and
obesity experience weight stigma,
victimization, teasing, and bullying,
which contribute to binge eating,
social isolation, avoidance of health
care services, and decreased
physical activity.28,43 Importantly,
internalized weight bias has been
associated with a negative impact on
mental health.60 Collectively, these
factors may adversely affect quality
of care, prevent patients with
overweight and obesity from
seeking medical care, and contribute
to worsened morbidity and
mortality, independent of excess
adiposity.28,43,44
Pediatricians and other PHCPs have
been—and remain—a source of
weight bias. They first need to
uncover and address their own
attitudes regarding children with
obesity. Understanding weight
stigma and bias, and learning how
to reduce it in the clinical setting,
sets the stage for productive
discussions and improved
relationships between families and
pediatricians or other PHCPs.
Acknowledging the multitude of
genetic and environmental factors
that contribute to the complexity of
obesity is an important mitigator in
reducing weight stigma.61 Additional
actions that reduce weight stigma
include having appropriately sized
office furniture, using appropriate
capacity medical equipment,
ensuring that aesthetic and/or
instructional images posted in the
office are inclusive, and avoiding
stigmatizing language.28 Accordingly,
the CPG utilizes person-first
language (ie, using the term “child
with obesity, rather than “obese
child”) to avoid labeling the child.28
This practice is consistent with
recommendations from the AAP and
other national organizations,
including the Academy of Nutrition
and Dietetics, the Obesity Society,
and the Obesity Action Coalition.62
D. Adverse Childhood Experiences
Adverse childhood experiences
(ACEs) are negative experiences
caused by situations or events in the
lives of children and adolescents
that can pose threats to their
current and future physical and
mental health.63,64 These
experiences range from family
turmoil and violence to financial
hardship, loss of a parent, divorce,
abuse, and parental mental illness—to
name a few.65 ACEs have been
associated with obesity, both in
adulthood and in childhood.66–68
Children and adolescents who live in
poverty have a higher likelihood of
experiencing ACEs, but risk for ACEs
occurs at every income level.65,69 The
greater the number of ACEs a child or
adolescent experiences, the greater
the risk for obesity.70 The most
commonly cited mechanisms linking
ACEs to obesity are social disruption,
negative health behaviors, and
chronic stress response.71
Approach Summary
The recommendations in the CPG
are child-centric and not specific to
a particular health care setting and
are written to inform pediatricians
and other PHCPs about the standard
4
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 5]
of care for evaluating and treating
children with overweight and
obesity and related comorbidities.
To reflect the pediatrician’s and
PHCP’s individual relationship
with the child and family, the
Subcommittee refers to “evaluation”
(eg, for comorbidities) rather than
“screening.” It is anticipated that a
pediatrician’s or other PHCP’s
setting, training, and expertise may
moderate how elements of the CPG
are implemented. Helpful resources
can be found in accompanying
implementation materials.
Understanding the underlying
genetic, biological, environmental,
and social determinants that pose
risk for obesity is the bedrock of all
evaluation and intervention.
Allowing the family to have a safe
space to understand and process the
complexity of obesity and its
chronicity requires tact, empathy,
and humility. Achieving this goal
enables the patient and family to
gain the knowledge and
understanding needed to recognize
risk factors in their environment
and behaviors, to honor cultural
preferences, and to institute changes
independently as well as under the
guidance of a trusted and well-
trained advocate—such as
pediatricians and other PHCPs.
Finally, to emphasize important
goals of treatment—both improved
weight status and reduction or
elimination of comorbidities—the
Subcommittee uses the term
intensive health behavior and
lifestyle treatment (IHBLT) rather
than “intensive lifestyle or
behavioral modification” or “weight
management.” Additional definitions
are listed in the next section.
III. DEFINITION OF TERMS
BMI: BMI is a measure used to
screen for excess body adiposity; it
is calculated by dividing a person’s
weight in kilograms by the square of
height in meters. For children and
teens, BMI interpretation is age- and
sex-specific. A child’s BMI category
(eg, healthy weight, overweight) is
determined using an age- and sex-
specific percentile for BMI rather
than the BMI cut-points used for
adult categories.72
Capacity-building: “Building
individual competencies and
technical expertise, strengthening
organizational capacities, and
enabling supportive structural
environments” to maintain or
improve health services
delivery.73
Children with special health care
needs: Children with special health
care needs are those who have, or
who are at increased risk for, a
chronic physical, developmental,
behavioral, or emotional condition
and who also require health and
related services of a type or amount
beyond that required by children
generally.74
Chronic care model: The chronic
care model identifies essential
elements of a health care system
that encourage high-quality chronic
disease care: the community; the
health system; self-management
support; delivery system design;
decision support, and clinical
information systems.75
Chronic disease: The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) defines chronic diseases
broadly as “conditions that last
1 year or more and require ongoing
medical attention or limit activities
of daily living or both.”76 Obesity is
a chronic disease that results in
altered anatomy, physiology, and
metabolism—all of which adversely
affect the physical and mental health
trajectory of children and
adolescents.77 The Obesity Medicine
Association defines obesity as a
“chronic, relapsing, multifactorial,
neurobehavioral disease, wherein an
increase in body fat promotes
adipose tissue dysfunction and
abnormal fat mass physical forces,
resulting in adverse metabolic,
biomechanical, and psychosocial
health consequences.”78
Comprehensive obesity treatment:
Comprehensive obesity treatment
(COT) (Fig 1) includes79,80:

Providing intensive, longitudinal
treatment in the medical home

Evaluating and monitoring child
or adolescent for obesity-related
medical and psychological
comorbidities

Identifying and addressing social
drivers of health

Using nonstigmatizing approaches
to clinical treatment that honor
unique individual qualities of each
child and family

Using motivational interviewing
that addresses nutrition, physical
activity, and health behavior
change using evidence-based
targets for weight reduction and
health promotion

Setting collaborative treatment goals
not limited to BMI stabilization or
reduction; including goals which
reflect improvement or resolution
of comorbidities, quality of life,
self-image, and other goals related
to holistic care

Integrating weight management
components and strategies across
appropriate disciplines, which
can include intensive health
behavior and lifestyle treatment,
with pharmacotherapy and
metabolic and bariatric surgery if
indicated

Tailoring treatment to the ongoing
and changing needs of the individual
child or adolescent, and the family
and community context
Comprehensive patient history: A
comprehensive patient history
includes a review of systems; family
history; history of present illness;
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
5
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 6]
and appropriate nutritional, physical
activity, and psychosocial history.
Family-based treatment: Family-
based treatment centers on the
role of family at each stage of child
development, includes consideration of
the family’s critical role in supporting
child health, and understands the unique
contextual elements that affect the patient
and family and influence treatment.
Intensive health behavior and
lifestyle treatment: IHBLT educates
and supports families in nutrition
and physical activity changes that
improve weight status and
comorbidities and promote long-
term health. IHBLT is most often
effective when it occurs face-to-
face, engages the whole family,
and delivers at least 26 hours of
nutrition, physical activity, and
behavior change lessons over 3 to
12 months. IHBLT is foundational
to COT and should continue
longitudinally. It should be
provided in conjunction with
pharmacotherapy and metabolic
and bariatric surgery if these
treatments are indicated. IHBLT
may be available in the form of a
defined program and may be
offered in pediatrician and other
PHCP offices, medical centers or
health systems, or in partnership
with community organizations.
Longitudinal care: Care provided
by a group of health care
professionals who monitor a
patient’s weight and other health
indicators over a length of time
sufficient to be associated with
health improvements. Longitudinal
care is continuous and coordinated
and should include a plan for
transition into adulthood.
Overweight and obesity: Overweight
is defined as a BMI at or above the
85th percentile and below the 95th
percentile for children and teens of
the same age and sex. Obesity is
defined as a BMI at or above the
95th percentile for children and
teens of the same age and sex.
Pediatricians and other pediatric
health care providers: For the
purpose of this CPG, pediatricians
and other pediatric health care
providers refers to a qualified
primary or tertiary care medical
provider operating within their
scope of practice and providing
clinical care to children and
adolescents. Examples include
physicians, nurse practitioners, and
physician assistants. (This document
also refers to dietitians, licensed
psychologists, exercise specialists,
and other health care professionals
who are not practicing medicine in
the same manner.)
Pediatric medical home: The
“pediatric medical home” delivers
accessible, continuous, comprehensive,
patient- and family-centered,
coordinated, compassionate, and
culturally effective health care. In this
venue, well-trained pediatric physicians
known to the child and family deliver
or direct primary medical care.81
Pediatric obesity specialist or
clinician with expertise: Pediatric
obesity specialists and clinicians
with expertise are health care
professionals with additional
training in pediatric obesity
medicine. Training may take the
form of certification programs
specific to obesity, fellowship, or a
focus during specialty training, such
as within endocrinology or
gastroenterology specialty training.
It may also take the form of an
informal apprenticeship combined
with professional workshops. For
the purposes of this document, such
training occurs within the context of
recognized health care professional
organizations.
Person-first language: According
to the CDC, person-first language
emphasizes the individual, not their
disabilities.82 Hence, this CPG describes
“children with obesity” or “adolescents
with overweight,” not “obese children”
and/or “overweight adolescents.”
Severe obesity: The expanded
definition of “severe obesity” includes
Class 2 and Class 3 obesity.83

Class 2 obesity ($120% to
<140% of the 95th percentile) or
a BMI $ 35 kg/m2 to <39 kg/m2,
whichever is lower based on age
and sex

Class 3 obesity ($140% of the 95th
percentile) or BMI $ 40 kg/m2,
whichever is lower based on age
and sex
Social determinants of health
(SDoHs): SDoHs are the conditions
in the environments where people
are born, live, learn, work, play,
worship, and age that affect a wide
range of health, functioning, and
quality-of-life outcomes and risks.
SDoHs can be grouped into 5
domains: economic stability,
education access and quality,
neighborhood and built
environment, and social and
community context.8,84,85
Treatment intensification:
Treatment intensification occurs
through increased frequency of
contact, increased length of
treatment, or other means of
increasing the dose of treatment.
Treatment intensification could
include additional health care
professionals and/or additional
methods, such as physical therapy,
psychotherapy, medical nutrition
therapy, pharmacotherapy, or
metabolic and bariatric surgery.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Subcommittee Process and
Support
In 2017, the CDC supported the
AAP’s Institute for Healthy Child
6
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 7]
Weight (the Institute) to conduct an
evidence review of obesity treatment
and obesity-related comorbidities. The
Institute identified a methodologist
and convened an evidence review
committee consisting of pediatricians
and researchers with expertise in
pediatric obesity etiologies, diagnosis,
and management. This committee,
which met regularly in 2018 to 2019,
followed established methods
(elaborated on below) to create 2 TRs,
which capture the evidence review
committee’s findings and detail the
search criteria, systematic review
process, and research history. One TR
is on overweight and obesity
treatment (https://doi.org/10.1542/
peds.2022-060643) and the second is
on overweight and obesity
comorbidities (https://doi.org/
10.1542/peds.2022-060643).
Staff from the Institute and the
AAP’s Council on Quality
Improvement and Patient Safety
formed a CPG writing
Subcommittee, comprising the
methodologist and several
evidence review committee
members; a range of pediatric
primary and tertiary care
providers; behavioral health,
nutrition, and public health
researchers; a pediatric surgeon;
medical epidemiologists from the
CDC Division of Nutrition, Physical
Activity and Obesity; an
implementation scientist; a parent
representative; and a
representative from the AAP
Partnership for Policy
Implementation. Most
Subcommittee members also have
other national organization
affiliations relevant to pediatric
overweight and obesity.
The Subcommittee members were
identified by the AAP and met
regularly in 2019 and 2020 and
virtually thereafter. Members were
assigned sections and met virtually
to complete their sections. Sections
were reviewed by the chair or
cochair and outstanding issues were
resolved by group consensus. The
parent member was an at-large
member of all the writing groups
and reviewed each section.
Members’ potential conflicts of
interest were identified and
considered; no conflicts prevented
Subcommittee members from
participating in the CPG
development process.
B. Scope of the Review
This review was designed to answer
2 overarching key questions (KQs).
KQ1 was: “What are effective
clinically based treatments for
pediatric obesity?” KQ2 was: “What
is the risk of comorbidities among
children with obesity?”
The Subcommittee developed this
focus based on the needs of
pediatricians and other PHCPs and
the evidence required to inform the
future development of clinical
practice guidelines. The review did
not attempt to address treatment
strategies for comorbidities
(eg, hypertension [HTN], sleep
apnea, type 2 diabetes mellitus
[T2DM]), as other guidelines and
reviews are available to guide such
treatment.86–90
B.1. Rationale for KQ1: Intervention
Studies
Pediatricians and other PHCPs are a
trusted source of health information
for parents, including on issues
related to nutrition and physical
activity, which are key components
of obesity prevention and treatment.
To meet this need, pediatricians and
other PHCPs need to know the
strategies that have high-quality
evidence for effectiveness in
preventing and treating obesity.
Additionally, pediatricians and other
PHCPs need guidance on which
treatments are effective for their
population and how to leverage
available resources for obesity
treatment efforts.
B.2. Rationale for KQ2: Comorbidity
Studies
Previous recommendations have
included assessments of
comorbidities, including HTN,
dyslipidemia, glucose, fatty liver
disease, and others. It is not clear
whether these assessments lead to
improved treatment strategies or
outcomes. Additionally, it is not
clear whether conducting these
assessments would result in an
adverse outcome. We examined
specific conditions that were
previously recommended or that
would reasonably require screening:
dyslipidemia, HTN, diabetes, fatty
liver disease, depression, sleep
apnea, and asthma. This is not
intended to be a comprehensive list
of all conditions comorbid with
obesity but represents those most
common and for which screening is
potentially helpful.
C. Search Strategy
The Evidence Review Subcommittee
searched PubMed and CENTRAL
(for trials). The initial search was on
April 6, 2018, and an additional
search was conducted to update the
review, covering the time period
April 7, 2018 through February 15,
2020. Both searches followed the
same procedures, which are
described below.
The Subcommittee combined the
searches for both KQ1 and KQ2
because of their significant overlap to
more efficiently review studies.
Because the focus was on interventions
that are relevant to primary care, the
Subcommittee did not search other
discipline-specific databases, such as
ERIC or PsycInfo.
The Subcommittee searched for
studies of children or adolescents,
with a focus on overweight, obesity,
or weight status; involving
pediatricians, other pediatric health
care providers, health care, or other
treatment or screening (KQ1); and
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
7
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 8]
examining common comorbidities
(KQ2). For both questions, the
Subcommittee limited only using
key words, not filters, to ensure the
inclusion of the newest studies that
had not yet been fully indexed. No
date limits were placed on searches.
In practice, this meant the
Subcommittee reviewed studies
from 1950 to 2020, although fewer
than 2% of the studies were from
before 1980.
The complete search strategies are
included in Appendix 2 of the
accompanying TRs (https://doi.org/
10.1542/peds.2022-060642 and
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2022-
060643).
D. Inclusion Criteria
D.1. Inclusion Criteria Common to All
Studies
All studies were required to include
children ages 2 to 18 years. Studies
could also include young adults up
to age 25, if this population was
stratified from older adult
participants, as long as children
younger than 18 years were also
included in the study. Children could
have other conditions (eg, asthma),
as long as these conditions were not
known to cause obesity, or be taking
medications (eg, steroids) other
than those known to be significantly
obesogenic. Conditions known to
cause obesity, such as Prader-Willi
syndrome, obesogenic medication
(eg, antipsychotics), or known
genetic mutations associated with
obesity (eg, melanocortin 4 receptor
[MC4R]) were excluded.
All studies had to originate from
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development
member countries and be available
in English.
The race distribution of the samples
is reported in the accompanying
technical report evidence overview
(Appendix 5 in TRs [https://doi.org/
10.1542/peds.2022-060642 and
https://doi.org/10.1542/
peds.2022-060643]) to assist in in-
terpretation of evidence within a
health equity framework. The tech-
nical report authors notated in the
“special populations” section of Ap-
pendix 5 when each study specifi-
cally focused on a lower-resourced
population, as well as race and eth-
nicity distributions for all studies.
D.2. Inclusion Criteria for KQ1
(Intervention Studies)
The primary aim of the intervention
studies had to be examination of an
obesity prevention (intended for
children of any weight status) or
treatment (intended for children
with overweight or obesity)
intervention. The primary intended
outcome had to be obesity, broadly
defined, and not an obesity
comorbidity. Studies of obesity
interventions that reported other
outcomes were included.
Interventions could involve any
approach, including screening,
counseling, medically managed
weight loss, pharmaceutical
treatment, or surgery. Regardless of
the intervention components, there
had to be some level of outpatient
clinical involvement in the
treatment (ie, not just referral to an
outside program), such as screening
or a clinic follow-up appointment.
Interventions that occurred
completely outside the scope of
health care were excluded. For
example, school-based obesity
prevention programs or community-
based activity programs with no
pediatrician or other pediatric
health care provider involvement
were excluded.
The Subcommittee did not limit the
search by study design but did
report experimental and
nonexperimental studies separately.
Although nonexperimental designs
were included, all studies had to
have a relevant comparison group to
be included in the TR on
interventions (https://doi.org/
10.1542/peds.2022-060642).
D.3. Inclusion Criteria for KQ2 (Comorbidity
Studies)
The Subcommittee included studies
that had a primary aim of
comparing comorbidities among
those with and without obesity or
by severity of obesity. Obesity and
the comorbidity had to be measured
contemporaneously to reflect the
practice of clinical screening.
Obesity had to be categorized using
a BMI-based measure into accepted
categories (ie, healthy weight,
overweight, class 1 obesity, class 2
obesity, class 3 obesity). These
categories could be based on
percentiles or z-scores and could
use the distributions relevant to the
studied population (eg, World
Health Organization [WHO] or the
CDC).91,92
All studies had to include 1 or more
of the following comorbidities:
lipids, blood pressure (BP), HTN,
liver function, glucose metabolism,
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA),
asthma, or depression. These were
chosen based on known associations
with weight and potential for
screening in the primary care
setting.
The complete inclusion criteria are
included in Appendix 3 of the
accompanying TR on comorbidities
(https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.
2022-060643).
E. Review Process
The Subcommittee used Covidence to
manage the review process (https://
www.covidence.org/). Covidence is a
program for online collaboration and
management of systematic reviews.
All abstracts were reviewed by
2 independent reviewers on the
Subcommittee, who assessed the
study’s inclusion in the full-text
8
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 9]
review process. All conflicts were
discussed and resolved. Articles
excluded at this stage were assigned
an exclusion reason, with a hierarchy,
which is shown in Appendix 4 of the
accompanying TRs (https://doi.org/
10.1542/peds.2022-060642 and
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2022-
060643).
F. Data Extraction and Quality
Assessment
All articles deemed to meet criteria
for full text inclusion were
categorized into different data
extraction strategies. Randomized
trials were given a quality
assessment using the Cochrane Risk
of Bias tool. The Subcommittee
decided not to limit studies based on
the study quality, because many of
them did not reach “high-quality”
status (ie, at low risk of bias for most
or all domains in the Cochrane Risk
of Bias Assessment) using any of the
tools. This occurred largely because
studies consisted primarily of
behavioral interventions without the
possibility of blinding.
All studies, regardless of group, were
fully extracted by 2 reviewers, and
conflicts were discussed and resolved.
Intervention studies were categorized
into 5 groups for data extraction.
F.1. Group 1 Extraction
Group 1 articles included
randomized trials of diet or
“lifestyle” interventions. Extraction
of these articles included:
sponsorship or funder, design,
population information, provider
type, detailed intervention
strategies and intensity, and BMI-
based outcomes. The Subcommittee
also identified outcomes other than
BMI, including lipids, glucose
metabolism, BP, other laboratory
values, other obesity measures,
psychosocial outcomes, mental
health, behaviors, and other
outcomes (primarily parent BMI
and child cardiovascular fitness).
The Subcommittee categorized the
intensity of interventions in a manner
consistent with the US Preventive
Services Task Force (USPSTF) to
allow for comparisons with its
findings, into interventions with a
dose (number of hours) of <5 hours;
5 to 25 hours; 26 to 51 hours; and 52
or more hours. All interventions
occurred over less than 1 year. The
Subcommittee conducted quality
assessment for group 1 articles.
F.2. Group 2 Extraction
Group 2 articles included
randomized controlled trials of
pharmaceutical treatments. Similar
information as above was extracted,
using a brief description of the
FIGURE 1
Treatment experience of obesity as a chronic disease (this figure illustrates how longitudinal care is important to help address this chronicity and to ad-
dress and buffer the social and contextual factors that influence a person’s health).
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
9
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 10]
treatment and no categorization of
intensity. These articles also
received a quality assessment.
F.3. Groups 3 Through 5 Extraction
i) Groups 3 Through 5 Articles Group
3 articles included nonrandomized
comparative studies of diet and
“lifestyle” treatments, group 4
articles included nonrandomized
comparative studies of
pharmaceutical treatment, and
group 5 articles included any
surgical studies.
Because of small numbers, the
Subcommittee combined randomized
and nonrandomized surgical studies.
Brief treatment descriptions and BMI-
related outcome data were extracted
from these, but the Cochrane Risk of
Bias tool was not used because these
were observational designs.
F4. KQ2 Extraction (Comorbidity Studies)
All studies were extracted by 2
reviewers who reported prevalence
of comorbidities or mean values of
laboratory parameters by weight
classification. The Subcommittee
included healthy weight, overweight,
class 1 obesity, class 2 obesity, and
class 3 obesity.
Because all classes of obesity
severity were not always reported
in the studies, these classes may
include higher groups. For example,
reporting of $95th percentile would
only be considered class 1 obesity,
although children at higher levels
may be included. (See the TR for a
detailed description of the KQ1
extraction procedures.)
G. Data Synthesis and Analysis
The Subcommittee’s primary
method of data synthesis was
narrative. To allow broad inclusion,
the Subcommittee did not limit to
specific designs or measures that
would facilitate meta-analysis. The
Subcommittee has reported on
studies in each group based on their
type and design and has reported
findings for outcomes other than BMI.
The AAP policy statement, “Classifying
Recommendations for Clinical Practice
Guidelines,” was followed in
designating aggregate evidence
quality levels for the available
evidence (Fig 2).93 The AAP policy
statement is consistent with the
grading recommendations advanced
by the University of Oxford Centre for
Evidence-Based Medicine.
Evidence grades were determined
based on the grading matrix in
Fig 2. Although we included both
trials and observational studies in
the technical reports, they are
reviewed separately. Study design
was considered in the aggregate
evidence quality grades, as indicated
by the matrix. We did not explicitly
use risk of bias scores, but this
information was available and used
in the Subcommittee’s final
assessment.
The Subcommittee reached consensus
on the evidence, which was then used
to develop the clinical practice
guideline’s KASs. When the scientific
evidence was at least “good” in quality
and demonstrated a preponderance of
benefits over harms, the KAS provides
a “strong recommendation” or
“recommendation.” Clinicians should
follow a strong recommendation
unless a clear and compelling
rationale for an alternative approach
is present; clinicians are prudent to
follow a recommendation but are
advised to remain alert to new
information and be sensitive to
patient preferences (Fig 2).
Integrating evidence quality appraisal
with an assessment of the anticipated
balance between benefits and harms
leads to a designation of a strong
recommendation, recommendation,
option, or no recommendation. Once
the evidence level was determined,
an evidence grade was assigned.
AAP policy stipulates that the evidence
FIGURE 2
Grading matrix.
10
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 11]
supporting each KAS be prospectively
identified, appraised, and summarized,
and an explicit link between quality
levels and the grade of
recommendation must be defined.
Possible grades of recommendations
range from “A” to “D,” with “A”
being the highest:

Grade A: consistent level A studies;

Grade B: consistent level B or
extrapolations from level A studies;

Grade C: level C studies or
extrapolations from level B or
level C studies;

Grade D: level D evidence or
troublingly inconsistent or incon-
clusive studies of any level; and

Level X: not an explicit level of
evidence as outlined by the Centre
for Evidence-Based Medicine. This
level is reserved for interventions
that are unethical or impossible to
test in a controlled or scientific
fashion and for which the prepon-
derance of benefit or harm is over-
whelming, precluding rigorous
investigation.
When it was not possible to identify
sufficient evidence, recommendations
are based on the consensus opinion of
the Subcommittee members.
VI. EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CHILDHOOD AND
ADOLESCENT OBESITY
A. Prevalence of Childhood Obesity
Obesity is a common, complex, and
often persistent chronic disease
associated with serious health and
social consequences.94 Childhood
obesity is typically defined as having a
BMI of $95th percentile for age and
sex.95 Severe obesity is defined as BMI
$ 120% of the 95th percentile for age
and sex. The percentage of US
children and adolescents affected by
obesity has more than tripled from
5% in 1963 to 1965 to 19% in 2017
to 2018.2 In 2017 to 2018, the rise in
obesity prevalence slowed in children
younger than 6 years of age, but
increases continued among certain
populations, including adolescents and
non-Hispanic Black and Mexican
American youth.4 A predictive
epidemiologic model estimates that if
2017 obesity trends hold, 57% of
children aged 2 to 19 years will have
obesity by the time they are
35 years of age, in 2050.36
Obesity prevalence increases with
increasing age.3 For example, in
2015 to 2016, the prevalence of
obesity in children aged 2 to
5 years, 6 to 11 years, and 12 to
19 years was 13.9%, 18.4%, and
20.6%, respectively.3 Among
children younger than 6 years, there
were no significant trends in obesity
from 1999 to 2018 for those 2
through 5 years of age.4 For
children 6 through 11 years of age,
significant trends in obesity show an
increased prevalence from 15.8% in
1999 to 2002 to 19.3% in 2015 to
2018.4 Similarly, among adolescents
12 through 19 years, trends show
increased obesity in the same time
period from 16.0% to 20.9%.4 The
proportion of children and youth 2
to 19 years of age with severe
obesity increased from 4.9% in
1999 to 2000 to 7.9% in 2015 to
2016.4,96 The prevalence of severe
obesity in youth 12 to 19 years of
age in 2015 to 2018 was 7.6%.4
The COVID-19 pandemic has
significantly affected the lives and
routines of children and adolescents.
In 1 analysis, the pandemic period
was associated with a doubling in
the rate of BMI increase compared
with the prepandemic period.97
Obesity prevention and management
efforts should routinely include
health care provider screening for
BMI, food security, and social
determinants of health and
increased access to evidence-based
pediatric weight management
programs and food assistance
resources to mitigate such effects in
the future.97
Disparities exist among children and
youth with obesity, including, but
not limited to, lower level of
parental education, lower income,
less access to healthier food options
and safe and affordable physical
activity opportunities, and higher
incidence of ACEs.70,98,99 For
example, among 5345 children 6 to
9 years of age, those whose parents
had lower levels of education had a
greater odds of having obesity
compared with children whose
parents had higher levels of
education (odds ratio: 1.78; 95%
confidence interval [CI]: 1.36 to
2.32).100 A cross-sectional analysis of
111 799 children in Massachusetts at
the school district level showed that
for every 1 percentage point increase
in the proportion of children with
low SES, there was a 1.17 percentage
point increase in the prevalence of
obesity.101 Furthermore, children
with disabilities, including those with
intellectual disabilities, are at higher
risk for developing obesity than their
peers without disabilities.102
Finally, among 43 864 children and
adolescents aged 10 to 17 years old,
the presence of 2 or more early
ACEs was associated with an
increased odds of obesity later in
childhood and adolescence (odds
ratio: 1.21; 95% CI: 1.02 to 1.44).103
Together, these disparities highlight
the burden of obesity in children
from families of lower SES and the
need to provide strategies to
minimize these inequities.
Disparities also exist in obesity
prevalence across ethnic and racial
groups. In 2015 to 2018, non-
Hispanic Black children and Mexican
American youth 6 to 11 years of age
had a higher prevalence of obesity
compared with non-Hispanic white
children (22.7% and 28.2% vs
15.5%, respectively).4 An analysis of
the Indian Health Services National
Data Warehouse showed that in
2015, the prevalence of overweight
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
11
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 12]
and obesity in American Indian and
Alaska Native (AI/AN) children and
adolescents was 18.5% and 29.7%,
respectively.104
Among children 2 to 5 years of age
from lower-income families enrolled
in the Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women,
Infants, and Children program,
recent analyses indicate a modest
but significant decline in obesity
prevalence from 2010 (15.9%) to
2018 (14.4%).106 Among these
children, obesity prevalence ranged
across states from 8.5% to 20.2%;
disparities persisted by race and
ethnicity despite changes in
prevalence over time.105
In addition, children and youth with
special health care needs (CYSHCN)
have a higher prevalence of obesity
and lower levels of physical activity
compared with children having typical
growth and development.106–108
Among CYSHCN, a metanalysis of
studies of adolescents with intellectual
disabilities found a pooled odds ratio
of obesity of 1.80 compared with
adolescents with typical
development.102
B. Impact of Obesity in Childhood
Children with obesity commonly
become adolescents and adults with
obesity; severe obesity during
adolescence increases the risk for
severe obesity during young
adulthood.109,110 BMI levels strongly
track throughout childhood and
adolescence and are predictive of
high adult BMI.110
Obesity puts children and adolescents
at risk for serious short- and long-
term adverse health outcomes later in
life, including cardiovascular disease,
including HTN; dyslipidemia; insulin
resistance; T2DM; and nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD).38,96,111–113
Additionally, prediabetes in youth
with obesity, compared with youth
with normal weight, has been
associated with elevated systolic blood
pressure and low-density lipoprotein,
and lower insulin sensitivity.114
In addition to physical and
metabolic consequences, obesity in
childhood and adolescence is
associated with poor psychological
and emotional health, increased
stress, depressive symptoms, and
low self-esteem.115 Several studies
have determined that children of
some racial and ethnic groups have
a greater prevalence of
comorbidities associated with
childhood obesity, including HTN,
T2DM, hypercholesterolemia, and
depression, compared with non-
Hispanic white children.116–120
Obesity in childhood and
adolescence is associated with
health care utilization and costs. For
example, the most common primary
conditions that cooccur with a
secondary diagnosis of obesity and
may increase costs and utilization
include pregnancy, mood disorders,
asthma, and diabetes.121 A modeling
study has estimated that the total
lifetime medical costs for 10-year-
olds with lifelong obesity to be in
the range of $9.4 to $14 billion for
that cohort alone.122
Tracking obesity across the lifespan
underscores the importance of
primary and secondary prevention
and treatment efforts early in life.
These efforts include evaluating for
obesity using BMI; identifying
children at high risk and adolescents;
providing or referring to evidence-
based obesity treatments for
children, youth, and their families;
and addressing SDoHs.
VII. DIAGNOSIS AND MEASUREMENT
Although KAS 1 was not explicitly
studied and referenced by the TR,
most of the TR studies implicitly
included measurement of height and
weight and calculation and plotting
of BMI as part of the study
procedures. Thus, the concept of
appropriate measurement,
calculation, charting, and tracking is
KAS 1. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should measure height and wt, calculate BMI, and assess BMI percentile using age- and sex-speciﬁc CDC growth charts or growth charts for children
with severe obesity at least annually for all children 2 to 18 y of age to screen for overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile), obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile), and severe
obesity (BMI $ 120% of the 95th percentile for age and sex).
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
Easy to use; reproducible; improved identiﬁcation of severe obesity; and improved ability to monitor
improvements in weight status of youth with severe obesity.
Risks, harms, costs
Screening tool with both false negatives and false positives; may misclassify some populations; development,
implementation, and use of separate growth charts for severe obesity requires identiﬁcation of severe
obesity (electronic health record decision prompts can support this); use of severe obesity growth charts
may confer stigma associated with obesity; interpretation and explanation for families may be challenging.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Beneﬁt outweighs harm.
Intentional vagueness
Growth charts based on reference populations; need to screen or assess adiposity for children among speciﬁc
populations (eg, CYSHCN); provider education on use and interpretation of charts; training requirements.
Role of patient preference
Patient and family inclusion and discussion is critical to shared decision-making.
Exclusions
>21 y
Strength
Moderate
Key references
79, 123–130
12
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 13]
implicit in research-based evidence
included in the TR (eg,
references123,124,126,130).
A. Use of BMI as a Screening and
Diagnosis Tool
The gold standard measurement of
body composition—dual-energy x-ray
absorptiometry—to identify, locate, and
quantify body fat, and can be expensive
and difficult to implement. In clinical
practice, BMI is frequently used as both
a screening and diagnostic tool for
detecting excess body fat because it is
easy to use and inexpensive. BMI is a
validated proxy measure of underlying
adiposity that is replicable and can
track weight status in children and
adolescents.38,131,132 Because of its ease
of use, BMI is also frequently used to
follow a child or adolescent’s weight
trajectory over time. The CDC BMI
growth curves are frequently used to
visualize BMI trajectory over time.
Furthermore, BMI is often used to
evaluate the success or impact of
interventions to improve weight status.
For most individuals, BMI is
generally well-correlated with direct
measures of body fat, including
skinfold thickness measurements,
bioelectrical impedance,
densitometry, and dual-energy x-ray
absorptiometry.131,133–139
BMI has limitations, however,
including high specificity and
low sensitivity for detecting excess
adiposity.132 BMI does not directly
measure body composition and
fat content and may under- or
overdetect excess adiposity in
certain racial and ethnic
groups.140,141 Finally, children
and adolescents who have high
fat-free mass may have a high BMI
and, as a result, be incorrectly
classified as having overweight or
obesity.142
The CDC’s 2000 Growth Charts are
based on NHANES data from the
1960s through the early 1990s and
include age- and sex-specific BMI-
for-age charts.143 The CDC Growth
Charts provide a historical
comparison of children’s weight
status relative to a time before the
current obesity epidemic during that
healthier growth patterns
predominated; thus, percentiles on
the Growth Charts do not equate to
the current population distribution
of BMI. The CDC Growth Charts are
recommended for clinically tracking
BMI patterns among US children and
adolescents aged 2 to 18 years;
although the CDC Growth Charts can
be used for adolescents aged 19 to
21 years, in practice, most
pediatricians and other PHCPs
transition to adult BMI calculation
and categorization for patients older
than 18 years.143
“Overweight” is defined as a BMI at
or above the 85th percentile and
below the 95th percentile for age
and sex; “obesity” is defined as a
BMI at or above the 95th percentile
for age and sex. “Severe obesity” is
defined as a BMI equal to or more
than 120% above the 95th
percentile, which approximates the
99th percentile. The CDC Growth
Charts were not intended to track
growth of children with extremely
high BMI values. Because of limited
data on children and adolescents
above the 97th percentile in the
reference population, higher
percentile curves could not
be generated. Caution was
recommended in extrapolation of
percentiles beyond the 97th
percentile, as this may generate
unusual or unexpected results.144 In
older adolescents, the adult cut-off
of a BMI equal to or greater than
30 kg/m2 can be used to define
obesity if this value is less than the
95th percentile BMI for age and sex.
Conversion of BMI percentiles to
z-scores (a statistical measure that
describes a value’s relationship to a
population mean) derived from the
CDC Growth Charts have historically
been used for assessing
longitudinalchange in adiposity over
time among children and adolescents
with obesity.127 The change in z-score,
however, may not accurately detect
meaningful changes in weight status
or comorbidity risk over time,
particularly for children and
adolescents with severe obesity
caused by compression of z-scores
corresponding to extremely high BMI
values into a very narrow range.145
Consequently, investigators have
proposed and described various
alternative options, including using
the degree to which, expressed in
percentage, a particular BMI percentile
was above the 95th percentile, or the
median, for age and sex (referred to
as percentage above the 95th
percentile, or percentage above the
median, respectively).
The “extended” method for calculating
BMI z-scores and percentiles at
extremely high BMI values was
developed to address these limitations.
This method incorporates data on
children and adolescents with obesity
from more recent NHANES surveys
to better characterize the BMI
distribution above the 95th percentile
while retaining the 2000 CDC Growth
Chart BMI distribution below the 95th
percentile.
The CDC and the AAP recommend
that weight status in children up to
2 years of age be tracked using the
WHO’s weight-for-length, age-, and
sex-specific charts.146,147 Specialized
growth charts for children and
adolescents with certain conditions,
such as trisomy 21, can provide
useful growth reference information
for special populations. These charts
may, however, be limited, for
example, by the small sample sizes
used in developing them, which may
not be representative of all children
and youth with trisomy 21.148
B. The Clinical Utility of BMI
BMI is a useful evaluation measure
to clinically identify children with
overweight and obesity for appropriate
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
13
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 14]
treatment—such as family-based
behavioral therapy—which can lead to
improvements in BMI and related
comorbidities.123,124,127–130,149–152
Following comprehensive systematic
reviews, the USPSTF issued a Grade B
recommendation that pediatricians and
other PHCPs screen children and
adolescents aged 6 years or older
annually for obesity—defined by BMI
percentile—and offer, or refer children
and adolescents to, a comprehensive,
intensive, family-based behavioral
treatment to improve weight status.79
(A “comprehensive, intensive
behavioral treatment” was defined as a
treatment of 26 hours or more over a
period of 2 to 12 months.) (See
Evaluation and Treatment sections.)
Furthermore, the AAP’s Bright
Futures recommendations, which are
based on systematic reviews and
expert panels, offer prevention
guidelines including annual
assessment of BMI alongside dietary
nutrition and physical activity
counseling for children and
adolescents starting at 2 years
old127,153(Appendix 2).
Appendix 2 describes the USPSTF
recommendations, Bright
Futures recommendations, and
the recommendations reflected
in this CPG’s KAS 1. All 3 sources
recommend annual screening for
excess weight using BMI, with the
USPSTF beginning at 6 years old and
both Bright Futures and this CPG
beginning at age 2 years. For
children or adolescents with a
BMI $ 95th percentile for age and
sex, the USPSTF provides
recommendations for primary care
providers to offer, or refer them to, a
comprehensive, family-based weight
management intervention. Bright
Futures recommends that primary
care providers screen for excess
weight and provide dietary nutrition
and physical activity counseling for
all children and adolescents with
either overweight or obesity
(BMI $ 85th and <95th percentile
for age and sex). Bright Futures also
provides implementation tips and
guidance for pediatricians and other
PHCPs including, for example,
providing counseling using
motivational interviewing. Bright
Futures offers guidance to states by
offering a framework for meeting
national performance standards
under Title V. Finally, Bright Futures
suggests how communities and
families can support healthier
lifestyles and prevention. This CPG
recommends referral to evidence-
based weight management
interventions for all children 2 years
and older who have a BMI $ 95th
percentile for age and sex (see KAS 1,
above).
The practice of annual BMI
measurement at well-child visits is
recommended and central to the
management and tracking of
overweight and obesity in
children.127,153,154 Limitations to
this approach include missed
opportunities to track and manage
weight changes that occur in less
than a 12-month period.127,153
However, other visit opportunities
can be used to assess BMI outside
the well-child visit.153 This CPG’s
KAS on evaluation, based on the
evidence described above, and in
concordance with USPSTF and the
Bright Futures recommendations,
continues to highlight the critical
importance of annual evaluation for
excess weight and the provision of,
or referral to, evidence-based
interventions, as indicated, to
promote the health and well-being
of all children and adolescents.
C. Communication of BMI and
Weight Status to Children and
Parents
Despite its limitations, BMI is
currently the most appropriate
clinical tool to screen for excess
adiposity and make the clinical
diagnosis of overweight or
obesity. Thus, the BMI must be
communicated to the patient and
family, as it guides next steps for
comprehensive evaluation and
treatment of obesity and related
comorbidities. Weight-related
discussions can be uncomfortable
for clinicians who want to avoid
stigmatizing children because of
their shape or size. Avoiding this
discussion may, however, cause
delays or barriers to patients
receiving evidence-based care. In
addition, obesity stigma can result in
patient avoidance of health care and
disruption of clinician-patient
relationships. There is evidence that
having conversations about obesity
can facilitate effective treatment.155–157
Three key factors can facilitate a
nonstigmatizing conversation about
weight with patients and families:
1. Ask permission to discuss the
patient’s BMI and/or weight.
2. Avoid labeling by using person-
first language (“Child with
obesity”; not “obese child” or “my
patient is affected by obesity; not
“my patient is obese”).158
3. Use words that are perceived as
neutral by parents, adolescents,
and children. In several studies
inclusive of diverse racial, ethnic,
and rural and urban populations,
preferred words include:
“unhealthy weight, gaining too
much weight for age, height, or
health, demasiado peso para su
salud (too much weight for his or
her health).” Words perceived as
most offensive include: “obese,
morbidly obese, large, fat,
overweight, chubby, or sobrepeso
(overweight).”156
Recognize that discussing BMI with
children, adolescents, and families,
even when using nonstigmatizing
language and preferred terms, can
14
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 15]
elicit strong emotional responses
including sadness or anger.
Acknowledging and validating those
responses, while keeping the focus
on the child’s health, can help to
strengthen the relationship between
the pediatrician or other PHCP and
patient and family to support
ongoing care.159
VIII. RISK FACTORS FOR CHILD AND
ADOLESCENT OVERWEIGHT AND
OBESITY
Obesity is a chronic disease that
has a multifactorial etiology. Risk
factors for overweight and
obesity—many of which are
SDoHs—include broader policies
and systems factors; institutional
or organizational (ie, school);
neighborhood and community;
and family, socioeconomic,
environmental, ecological, genetic,
and biological factors (Table 1).21,160
These individual, social, and contextual
risk factors often overlap and/or
influence one another and can operate
longitudinally throughout childhood
and adolescence, initiating weight gain
and escalating existing obesity.
Children and their families interact
with their environment at all of these
levels and have a unique and
“insider’s” point of view that needs to
be understood in delivering culturally
sensitive care.161
Pediatricians and other PHCPs need
to be aware of the risk factors for
pediatric obesity to provide early
anticipatory guidance for obesity
prevention, monitor their patients
closely, and intervene early when
weight trajectory increases.
Consensus Recommendation
The CPG authors recommend
pediatricians and other pediatric
health care providers:

perform initial and longitudinal
assessment of individual, structural,
and contextual risk factors to
provide individualized and tailored
treatment of the child or adoles-
cent with overweight or obesity.
A. Policy Factors
The larger macroenvironment—
including societal attitudes and beliefs,
government policies, food industry
practices, and the educational and
health care systems—can influence
obesity risk.162 It is difficult to make
or sustain healthy behavior changes in
an obesogenic environment that
promotes high-energy intake,
unhealthy dietary choices, and
sedentary behavior.
A.1. Marketing of Unhealthy Foods
Marketing of unhealthy food and
beverages directed at children tends
to negatively impact their dietary
choices and behaviors.163–166 Foods
and beverages embedded in
entertainment media have been
shown to influence eating behavior
choices of children and also increase
consumption of foods during or
after exposure to the embedded
foods.167
A systematic review and meta-
analysis showed that even short
exposure to unhealthy food and
beverage marketing targeted to
children resulted in in increased
dietary intake and behavior during
and after the exposure.168 Both
younger children and male children
(sex assigned at birth) tend to be
more susceptible to the food and
beverage marketing,168 and because
of their stage of cognitive
development, younger children are
more likely to be susceptible to
advertising and interpret it as
factual.169,170
Currently, marketing to children
targets highly palatable relatively
inexpensive energy-dense foods and
beverages.166 This marketing
occurs via television, websites,
online games, at supermarkets, and
outside schools.166 Children are,
unfortunately, frequently exposed
to foods of low nutritional values
from advertisements; therefore,
it is not surprising that they
have preferential increase in
consumption of foods of low
nutritional value.167
A.2. Underresourced Communities
Underresourced communities are
settings in which obesity risk factors
can predominate over health-
promoting factors. Children and
families in these settings may be
unable to access fresh fruits and
vegetables and safe physical activity
spaces and may suffer from food
insecurity.170–172 Limitations in
transportation, cost, affordability,
and availability may reduce access
to health care and obesity
treatment. Families may be
struggling with poverty, access to
healthy foods, lack of social
supports, racism, and/or
immigration status. Understanding
these contextual factors that impact
each child and family is crucial in
being able to provide compassionate
and effective obesity treatment.
A.2.a. Socioeconomic Status
Obesity has been shown to
disproportionately affect children
and adolescents who have low
SES.173–175 Even though the
prevalence of obesity has been
stabilizing among US children
overall, the rates continue to
increase among children with low
SES.173,176 According to the
Children’s Defense Fund, the poverty
rate among US children is
alarmingly high.177
A longitudinal analysis of
predominantly non-Hispanic white
children in the United States found
that low SES before 2 years of age
was associated with higher obesity
risk by adolescence in both boys
and girls; this analysis also indicated
that the effect of early poverty
endures later in life.178 Similarly,
another study found that low SES in
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
15
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 16]
early childhood had a long-term
impact on overweight and
obesity.179 This study found that the
risk of experiencing overweight or
obesity in adulthood was not altered
by either upward or downward
mobility of poverty after early
childhood,179 indicating the long-
term effect of poverty-related stress
in early childhood.
Low SES may also be associated
with higher risk for obesity by
increasing the child’s experience
with toxic stress. In addition,
poverty may limit access to healthy
foods and opportunities for physical
activity.180–182 Another study of a
large dataset of children followed
longitudinally from 9 months of age
to kindergarten entry showed that
SES played a major role in BMI
z-score gaps in Hispanic children,
whereas rapidity of weight gain in
the first 9 months “accounted for
much of the disparity between white
children and children” of other races
and ethnicities (other than Hispanic
children).180
A.2.b. Children in Families That Have
Immigrated
For decades, researchers have
believed that despite poverty and
other negative SES factors,
recently arrived immigrants are
healthier than their US-born
counterparts. Recent studies,
however, have examined large
datasets in novel ways and now
call this idea into question when it
comes to children in families that
have immigrated.183
As families who have immigrated try
to adjust to a new culture, they may
adopt Americanized foodways,
which are high in fat, sugar, and salt.
This tendency could be heightened
by children’s exposure to media
advertising these foods and high-
energy snacks and by reduced
physical activity.184,185
Patterns of childhood overweight
and obesity among families that
have immigrated vary substantially
by both ethnicity and generational
status. Immigrants to the United
States generally originate from
countries that have a lower
prevalence of obesity, but as
families acculturate to US eating and
activity patterns, rates of obesity
may increase. One study found that
second-generation Hispanic
immigrants were 55% more likely
to have obesity than nonimmigrant
white children, whereas first-
generation Asian immigrants had a
63% lower risk of having obesity.180
Several studies have indicated
different patterns of developing
obesity in Mexican-origin
populations among adults and
children. Obesity among adults of
Mexican origin in the United States
has been associated with longer
stays in the United States and with
being born in the United States
versus Mexico, which are 2 proxies
for acculturation. This pattern
differs in children, in whom
“significantly higher obesity
prevalence has been observed for
first-generation young adult males
(ages 18–24) and adolescent females
(ages 12–17).”186
In addition, in some cultures, larger
body sizes may be preferred as an
indication of health and wealth.187
This cultural factor may make it
more difficult for parents to
understand the gravity of their
children’s overweight or obesity. For
this and many other reasons, it is
vital to ensure that children and
families who have immigrated and
who are native-born have access to
culturally competent health care.188
A.3. Food Insecurity
The literature positing an
association between food
insecurity and overweight and
obesity in children has been
inconsistent when looking at
general child populations. Children
living in households with food
insecurity have been found,
however, to have higher BMI z-
scores and waist circumference
measurement and a greater
likelihood of having overweight or
obesity.189 The correlation
between food insecurity and
obesity has been found to be
higher in adolescents, who may
have had more exposure to food
insecurity over their life-
course.190 Female children appear
to more at risk for obesity in food-
insecure environments, compared
with male children.191
Food insecurity is highly associated
with poverty, and the cost of fruits
and vegetables192 and fast food
have been found to influence
consumption in low-income
families193,194 and to be positively
related to overweight in children.195
Associations between consuming
more sugar from sugar-sweetened
beverages, and less frequency of
eating breakfast and eating dinner
with family have also been noted in
families with food insecurity.190,196
Family dynamics around feeding
may change in situations of food
insecurity and include pressure to
eat as well as monitoring and
restrictive eating practices.191,197
Experiences of food insecurity are
stressful for children and families
and may add to the burden of
chronic stress, which can result in
altered eating patterns in the
direction of either restricting intake
or increasing consumption of
energy-dense foods.190,196
The AAP and Food Research and
Action Center’s toolkit, Screen and
Intervene: A Toolkit for Pediatricians
to Address Food Insecurity, is
designed to help pediatricians
identify and address childhood food
insecurity (available at https://frac.
16
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 17]
org/aaptoolkit). The Toolkit assists
pediatricians and other PHCPs to:
(1) better identify children living in
households struggling with food
insecurity; (2) sensitively address
the topic; (3) connect patients and
their families to federal nutrition
programs and community resour-
ces; and (4) advocate for greater
food security and improved overall
health of children and their fami-
lies. The toolkit also includes the
“Hunger Vital Sign,” a simple, vali-
dated 2-question tool that can be
used in the clinical setting to eval-
uate for food insecurity (see link to
toolkit above).
B. Neighborhood and Community
Environment Influences or
Contributors to Obesity
Environmental factors play an
important role in obesity
prevalence. Families’ dietary and
physical activity opportunities and
practices (mentioned above) are
influenced by their neighborhoods
(Table 1).
B.1. School Environment
Children spend most of their time in
school. Therefore, schools play an
important role in influencing
children’s food choices and physical
activity level and, ultimately, their
body weight. For example, the
presence of fast foods, vending
machines, and/or sweetened
beverages in schools may negatively
influence children’s food choices.198
Systematic reviews have shown an
association between fast food
outlets and convenience stores
located near schools and obesity in
children.199,200 When analyzed by
subgroups, a positive association has
been seen between fast-food outlets
and proximity to schools among
Hispanic, Black, and white children.
Although the association was seen
for all grade levels, the effect was
larger in younger grades.199 This
review also reported a stronger
association between fast-food
outlets and grocery stores located
near schools and obesity in
socioeconomically underresourced
neighborhoods.
B.2 Lack of Fresh Food Access
A neighborhood’s food environment
has been shown to have mixed
association with children’s BMI.
Although some studies have shown
that a 1.6-km distance or shorter
from a home to a supermarket is
associated with a lower BMI,201
other studies have found that the
greater the number of supermarkets
located near a child’s home, the
higher the child’s BMI.202 Similarly,
TABLE 1 Selected Examples of Multilevel Inﬂuencers and Contributors to Obesity
Example
Description
A. Policy factors
 Marketing of unhealthy foods
 Underresourced communities
 Food insecurity
B. Neighborhood and community factors
1. School environment
2. Lack of fresh food access
3. Fast food proximity
4. Access to safe physical activity
5. Environmental health
C. Family and home environment factors
1. Parenting feeding style
2. Sugar-sweetened beverages
3. Portion sizes
4. Snacking behavior
5. Dining out and family meals
6. Screen time
7. Sedentary behavior
8. Sleep duration
9. Environmental smoke exposure
10. Psychosocial stress
11. Adverse childhood experiences
D. Individual factors
D.1. Genetic factors
a. Monogenetic syndromes and polygenetic
effects
b. Epigenetic effects
D.2. Prenatal risk
a. Parental obesity
b. Maternal weight gain
c. Gestational diabetes
d. Maternal smoking
D.3. Postnatal risk
a. Birth weight
b. Early breastfeeding cessation and
formula feeding
c. Rapid weight gain during infancy and
early childhood
d. Early use of antibiotics
D.4. Childhood risk
a. Endocrine disorders
b. Children and youth with special health
care needs
1. Children with autism spectrum disorder
2. Children with developmental and
physical disabilities
3. Children with myelomeningocele
c. Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
d. Weight-promoting appetitive traits
e. Medication use (weight-promoting
medications)
f. Depression
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
17
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 18]
a systematic review reported mixed
association, with some studies
showing a negative association
between supermarket accessibility
and childhood and adolescent
obesity, and other studies either
showing a positive effect or no
association.203
Some of the differences were
attributed to variations in
assessment measures and lack
of adjustment for confounding
variables. Hence, it is not only the
presence of supermarkets that is
important, but also other factors that
may impact dietary choices—such as
the type of foods stocked, pricing,
etc. Some, but not all, studies have
reported a positive association
between neighborhood poverty and
childhood and adolescent obesity.204
It has been suggested that lack of
access to fresh fruits and vegetables
may be a risk factor for childhood
and adolescent obesity, as it may
lead to an increased reliance on,
and consumption of, unhealthy
foods. The data for this association
have been inconsistent, however. A
recent systematic review showed
that, although there was a negative
association between access to fresh
fruits and vegetables and healthy
eating behavior, the association
between access to fresh fruits and
vegetables and overweight and
obesity was inconclusive.205
B.3. Presence of Fast-food Restaurants
Fast-food restaurants generally
serve relatively low-priced and
calorie-rich fast foods with high
levels of saturated fat, simple
carbohydrates, sugar, and sodium.
Because of their easy availability,
taste, and marketing strategies, fast
foods tend to be popular with
children and adolescents.206
Fast-food consumption has been
associated with weight gain.207 Some,
but not all, studies have shown an
association between access to fast-
food restaurants and pediatric
obesity.208 A meta-analysis and recent
systematic review showed a mixed
association between access to fast-
food restaurants and weight-related
behaviors and weight status in
children and adolescents.209 This
association was shown to be stronger
in populations with lower SES.209
B.4. Access to Safe Physical Activity
A child’s environment may influence
the amount of physical activity they
get. For example, living in an urban
environment that lacks safe
walkable and/or green spaces in
which children can play may result
in decreased physical activity levels.
Greater exposure to green space has
been shown to be associated with
higher levels of physical activity and
lower risk of obesity.210
A recent systematic review of the
literature on the influence of the built
environment and childhood obesity
found significant association between
childhood obesity and traffic air
pollution and indicators of walkability
(which included intersection density
and presence and amount of park
area in the neighborhood).211
In addition to green spaces, other
aspects of the environment—including
safety—are important in these spaces’
use. A study of low-income preschool
children in New York City reported an
association of lower obesity risk in
neighborhoods with trees alongside
the streets and a positive association
between obesity and higher homicide
rates in the neighborhood.212
B.5. Environmental Health
Exposure to environmental hazards
during the prenatal period, infancy,
and childhood can have impacts on
the health and well-being of children.
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals
(EDC) can cross the placental barrier
and affect the fetus.213 There are
some data that show an association
between prenatal exposure to
bisphenol A and polyfluoroalkyl and
childhood obesity.214,215
In the postnatal and infancy period
exposure may occur through
breastfeeding, inhalation, ingestion,
or absorption through the skin.
Children get exposed to chemicals
that are used in household products
including cleaning agents, food
packaging, pesticides, fabrics,
upholstery, etc. Leaching of chemical
products (eg, bisphenols, phthalates,
parabens, and other EDCs) has been
reported in baby feeding bottles,
clothing, diaper creams, etc.
Exposure to EDCs during early
childhood can affect programming of
several systems, including endocrine
and metabolic systems, which may
affect BMI, cardiovascular, and
metabolic outcomes later in life.213
C. Family and Home Environment
Factors
The family’s dietary preferences and
lifestyle habits have a crucial role in
influencing the child’s weight.216
Parenting feeding practices and
modeling of eating behavior and the
type and quantities of foods and
beverages in the home have been
reported to be important influences
in children’s appetitive behaviors
and food preferences.217
C.1. Parenting Feeding Styles
Parenting styles differ and may
have an impact on a child’s risk
for obesity. Four types of parent
feeding styles have been described:
authoritative (responsive and
warm with high expectations);
authoritarian (not responsive but
with high expectations); permissive
or indulgent (responsive and warm
but lenient with few rules); and
negligent (not responsive with few
rules). The 4 parenting styles
discussed were initially defined by
Baumrind (1966) and later
expanded by Maccoby and Martin
(1983).218,219 (Restrictive feeding
18
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 19]
was not included as 1 of the
parenting styles.)
Authoritative feeding, where parents
respond to the child’s cues of
hunger and satiety, is considered to
be protective against excessive
weight gain. Children from
authoritative parenting homes have
been shown to eat more healthy
foods, be more physically active, and
have healthier BMI, compared with
children raised in homes with
authoritarian, permissive or
indulgent, or negligent parenting
styles.220,221
One possible mechanism of
parenting style’s influence on a
child’s weight status is thought to be
from interference in the child’s
ability to self-regulate their dietary
intake. An authoritarian parent, for
example, may not respond to a
child’s cues for energy intake,
resulting in poor ability on the part
of the child to self-regulate their
own energy intake, and a higher
likelihood of overindulging when
presented with an opportunity to
eat.222,223
A large cross-sectional study
showed that, among preschool- and
school-aged children, authoritarian
or negligent parenting is associated
with a higher risk of obesity,224
whereas authoritative parenting was
associated with healthy BMI.221
Among preschoolers, the effect of
the parenting feeding style was
found to be modulated by poverty,
with the effect only being seen
among children who were not living
in poverty.224
C.2. Family Home Environment Organization
A systematic review of associations
between the organization of the
family home environment and
childhood obesity found that
greater organization of the home
environment, which included
practices such as having family
routines and setting limits,
was inversely associated with
obesity.225 This relationship was
present for younger and older
children. Most but not all of the
32 studies included in the review
controlled for sociodemographic
factors.
C.3. Sugar-Sweetened Beverages
A systematic review of 20
prospective cohort studies and
randomized controlled trials from
2013 to 2015 found that sugar-
sweetened beverages (SSBs) were
positively associated with obesity
in children in all but 1 study
(96%).226 Based on this review and
others demonstrating a link
between SSB and multiple other
medical and dental diseases, the
AAP published a policy statement
on SSBs in 2019, calling for broad
implementation of policies
restricting SSB consumption in
children and adolescents.227
C.4. Portion Sizes
Much of the research on the influence
of portion size on children’s intake
has been performed in laboratory
settings providing a single meal
to preschool-aged children. A
comprehensive review of this
research reported that children who
serve or are served larger portions of
commonly liked energy-dense foods
typically consume larger amounts but
cautioned that long-term studies of
the effects of larger portions over
time on a number of variables,
including body weight, are lacking.228
C.5. Snacking Behavior
A recent systematic review of body
fat and consumption of ultra-
processed foods (defined as snacks,
fast foods, junk foods, and
convenience foods) in children and
adolescents found a positive
association but noted that longer-
term studies examining the
association of these foods and
obesity are needed.229
C.6. Dining Out and Family Meals
Eating outside of the home has been
shown to be associated with higher
energy intake in both children and
adults.230,231 In the United States,
food eaten outside the home is
characterized by higher fat content,
larger portions, and greater energy
intake.230
In a systematic review of pediatric
and adult studies, eating at fast-food
establishments was associated with
much higher weight gain, compared
with eating at other types of
restaurants.231
Take-away food has also been
associated with high BMI.231 Hence,
eating outside of the home—
irrespective of the type of restaurant
establishment visited—is associated
with higher risk of weight or BMI
gain. Conversely, 2 meta-analyses
found that increased frequency of
eating family meals was associated
with lower risk of childhood
obesity.232,233
C.7. Screen Time
Some, but not all, studies report an
association between screen time
duration, childhood adiposity,234–236
and adult BMI.237 Some studies have
shown a dose-response effect of
screen time and childhood
adiposity,235 with screen time
greater than 2 hours per day being
positively associated with higher
risk of overweight or obesity.236 A
recent meta-analysis reported 42%
greater risk of overweight or obesity
with more than 2 hours per day of
television (TV) compared with 2 or
fewer hours.238
There is evidence to support the
association between screen time and
consumption of unhealthy diet and
high energy intake.235 The
appearance or depiction of food
items while engaging in screen time
may affect a child’s dietary behavior.
A systematic review examining food
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
19
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 20]
choice and intake showed that food
included in entertainment media
affects eating behaviors of
children.167 Children and
adolescents are more exposed to
food and beverage advertisements
when watching TV.239 Additionally,
increase in screen time may displace
physical activity and interfere with
sleep.235,240
Although “screen time” includes TV,
computer, video or videogames,
mobile phones, and other digital
devices, the majority of the studies
published examined the effect of TV
viewing.235 Male children and
adolescents tend to spend more
time on media screen devices and
other Internet technology than
female children and adolescents
do.236
C.8. Sedentary Behavior
The association between sedentary
behavior and adiposity has been
shown to range from small to
inconsistent.241 Studies examining
the effect of sedentary behavior
alone on weight using accelerometer
measures have shown no
association between sedentary
behavior and obesity. Teasing out
the effects of sedentary behavior
alone in treatment studies may be
challenging, as this is often
confounded with other behaviors
such as physical activity, screen
time, or increased intake of
unhealthy foods.241
C.9. Sleep Duration
Short sleep duration is associated
with higher risk of obesity in
children.242–244 A meta-analysis of
prospective cohort studies
demonstrated a dose-response
inverse association between sleep
duration and risk of childhood
overweight and obesity.244 Children
13 years and younger with short
sleep duration (10 hours) had a
76% increased risk of overweight or
obesity compared with their
counterparts with longer sleep
duration (12.2 hours).
Sleep restriction may be associated
with increased calorie
consumption.245,246 Additionally,
fatigue and decreased physical
activity has also been associated
with short sleep duration. It is
unclear whether the inverse
association between sleep and
adiposity is causal or a
consequence of hormonal or
metabolic disturbance.247 Although
the exact mechanism for this
association is unknown, some of the
consequences of short sleep
duration include hormonal and
metabolic alterations—such as
increased ghrelin and decreased
leptin—which may lead to
increased hunger.242
C.10. Environmental Smoke Exposure
Children exposed to environmental
tobacco smoke (ETS) have been
found to have higher BMI compared
with their nonexposed counterparts,
according to a systematic review of
ETS exposure and growth outcomes
in children up to 8 years of age.248
C.11. Psychosocial Stress
Psychosocial stress in the prenatal
period may have an effect on
endocrine function (hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis and
glucose–insulin metabolism) in the
child’s life course. A meta-analysis
showed that prenatal psychological
stress was associated with higher
risk of childhood and adolescent
obesity.249
Psychosocial and emotional issues
may lead to weight gain through
maladaptive coping mechanisms,
including eating in the absence of
hunger to suppress negative
emotions, appetite up-regulation,
low-grade inflammation, decrease in
physical activity, increase in
sedentary behavior, and sleep
disturbance.154,250,251 Depression
has been shown to be a risk factor
in both pediatric and adult
obesity.251 The association between
depression and obesity could be
reciprocal, as obesity may increase
depression risk.
C.12. Adverse Childhood Experiences
A number of studies have
documented an association between
ACEs and the development of
overweight and obesity. ACEs
impact occurs via toxic stress, which
occurs “when a child experiences
strong, frequent, and/or prolonged
adversity—such as physical or
emotional abuse, chronic neglect,
caregiver substance abuse or mental
illness, exposure to violence, and/or
the accumulated burdens of family
economic hardship—without
adequate adult support.”252,253
ACEs include a history of physical,
emotional, or sexual abuse;
exposure to domestic violence;
household dysfunction from
parental divorce or substance abuse;
economic insecurity; mental illness;
and/or loss of a parent because of
death or incarceration.69,254–257
A US study found that cumulative
ACEs doubled the risk of children
having overweight or obesity,
compared with their counterparts
with no history of ACEs.258
Unresolved stress and emotional
issues may result in maladaptive
coping strategies—such as binge
eating, eating in the absence of
hunger, impulsive eating, and poor
sleep hygiene—which may result in
further weight gain.
Poverty and associated toxic
stresses in utero and early
childhood have been suggested to
initiate neuroendocrine and/or
metabolic adaptations that produce
biological phenotypes and
obesogenic behaviors that lead to
obesity.259,260 These effects may
persist throughout the lifetime.260
20
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 21]
D. Individual-Level Influences or
Contributors to Obesity
D.1. Genetic Factors
Heritability studies suggest that
there is a 40% to 70% genetic
contribution to an individual’s
obesity risk.261–263 Genome-wide
association studies have identified
32 loci of significance to obesity
predisposition.264 Genetic causes of
obesity include both common and
rare genetic variants that involve
impairment of gene expression or
function.264
D.1.a and D.1.b. Monogenetic
Syndromes and Polygenetic Effects
Polygenetic causes of obesity are by
far the most common, and single
gene defects are rarer causes of
obesity. For example, MC4R, a
heterozygous mutation, is the most
common form of monogenic obesity
and accounts for only 2% to 5% of
severe obesity in children.265,266
Polygenic inheritance refers to a
single inherited phenotypic trait that
is controlled by 2 or more different
genes. Polygenic variants, on their
own, have little effect on an
individual’s phenotype. The
phenotypic effect manifests only in
the presence of, or in combination
with, other predisposing factors.
Children with genetic causes of
obesity may present with
characteristic clinical features that
have historically included findings
such as short stature, dysmorphic
features, developmental delay,
skeletal defects, deafness, retinal
changes, or intellectual disability.
It is important to note that more
recently discovered genetic
TABLE 2 Genetic Syndromes Associated With Obesity
Genetic Syndrome
Monogenetic disorders
MC4R deﬁciency
Increased lean body mass, accelerated linear growth. Hyperinsulinemia. May have lower
blood pressure.
Leptin deﬁciency
Normal linear growth with reduced adult height. Rapid-onset obesity with hypothalamic
dysfunction (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hypothyroidism). Alterations in immune
function. Responsive to leptin treatment.
Leptin receptor deﬁciency
Normal linear growth with reduced adult height. Rapid-onset obesity with Hypothalamic
dysfunction (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hypothyroidism). Alterations in immune
function. Not responsive to leptin therapy.
POMC deﬁciency
Accelerated childhood growth. Adrenocorticotropic hormone deﬁciency, mild hypothyroidism.
Red hair, light skin (in non-Hispanic white individuals).
Proprotein subtilisin or kexin type 1 deﬁciency
Failure to thrive in early infancy. Hypoglycemia, adrenocorticotropic hormone deﬁciency.
Intestinal malabsorption, diarrhea.
SRC1 deﬁciency
Impaired leptin-induced POMC expression.
Syndromic forms of obesity
Prader-Willi syndrome
In neonatal period poor feeding, failure to thrive, and hypotonia. By 4–8 y, hyperphagia with
food impulsiveness. Short stature. Growth hormone deﬁciency, hypogonadism.
Dysmorphia, intellectual disability, behavioral difﬁculties.
Alstrom syndrome
Short stature. Insulin resistance, T2DM, hypogonadism, hyperandrogenism in females,
hypothyroidism. Visual impairment, hearing loss, cardiomyopathy, hepatic dysfunction,
renal failure.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Normal stature. Hypogonadism, polydactyly, retinal dystrophy, renal malformation, cognitive
disabilities, polyuria, and polydipsia.
Smith-Magenis syndrome
Short stature. Disrupted melatonin signaling. Craniofacial anomalies, intellectual disability,
self-injurious behaviors, sleep disturbance.
SH2B1 deﬁciency
Hyperinsulinemia, delayed speech and language development, aggressive behavior.
Sim1 deﬁciency
Short stature. Hypopituitarism. Neonatal hypotonia, facial dysmorphism, developmental delay.
16p11.2 microdeletion syndrome
Developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, impaired
communication, and socialization skills.
Brain derived neurotrophic factor deﬁciency
Hyperphagia, impaired short-term memory, hyperactivity, learning disability. Patients with
Wilms tumor-aniridia (WAGR syndrome) have subset of deletions on chromosome
11p.12 including brain derived neurotrophic factor locus.
Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy
Short stature, round face, brachydactyly, subcutaneous ossiﬁcations. Some patients may
have mild developmental delay. If inherited from the mother, may be associated with
pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a.
Cohen syndrome
Hypotonia, intellectual disability, distinctive facial features with prominent upper central
teeth, broad nasal tip, smooth or shortened philtrum, thick hair and eyebrows, long
eyelashes, retinal dystrophy, acquired microcephaly, joint hyperextensibility.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
Macrosomia, macroglossia, hemihyperplasia, anterior abdominal wall defects, visceromegaly,
neonatal hypoglycemia, embryonal tumors, renal anomalies. Genetic alteration in
chromosome 11p15.5.
Adapted from Pediatric Obesity-Assessment, Treatment, and Prevention: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.268
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
21
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 22]
disorders associated with obesity
are not necessarily characterized by
these findings in childhood; for
instance, short stature is not a
hallmark of leptin deficiency in
children. Table 2 lists selected
monogenetic causes and syndromes
associated with obesity.
Early onset of severe obesity and the
presence of hyperphagia are the 2
clinical characteristics that distinguish
genetic disorders of obesity. “Early
onset” refers to the presence of
obesity before age 5. As noted
previously, “severe obesity” is
defined as BMI $ 120% of the
95th percentile for age and sex.
“Hyperphagia” is the presence of
insatiable hunger in which the
individual’s time to satiation is
long, the individual’s duration of
satiation is shorter, the individual’s
feelings of hunger are prolonged,
and the individual has a severe
preoccupation with food and
experiences distress if denied
food.267
D.1.c. Epigenetic Factors
Epigenetic factors can result in
alterations in gene expression
without alteration in genetic code.
These epigenetic factors may
modify the interaction of
environmental and individual
factors in promoting weight
gain.269 One of the critical periods
in the establishment of the
epigenome is considered to be
during embryonic development.270
Prepregnancy maternal or
paternal obesity, for example, may
influence epigenetic changes
during subsequent pregnancy,
increasing the risk of overweight
or obesity in the offspring.269
Other risk factors during
pregnancy—such as gestational
diabetes or maternal excessive
weight gain—may result in
epigenetic changes and increase
the risk of obesity in the offspring.
D.2. Prenatal Risk Factors
The perinatal environment plays an
important role in a child’s later
development of overweight or
obesity. The mechanisms by which
the fetal environment predisposes to
the development of obesity are
complex and poorly understood. They
probably include gene-environment
interactions or epigenetic changes
attributable to several environmental
factors, including maternal diet,
physical activity, and/or other
environmental contaminants.271,272
Preterm infants have a greater
likelihood of developing childhood
obesity.273–275 Although the exact
mechanisms for this association
are uncertain, several risk factors
have been postulated, including
feeding patterns leading to
accelerated weight gain in preterm
infants.273
D.2.a. Parental Obesity
Parental weight is a strong predictor
of pediatric obesity. Children are at
greatest risk of developing obesity
as an adult if at least 1 of their
parents has obesity.276 A meta-
analysis reported an increased risk
of adolescent excess adiposity if
either parent had overweight or
obesity; the risk increased if both
parents had obesity.277 Contributors
to this association include genetic,
environmental, and behavioral
factors or the interaction of these
factors, resulting in intergenerational
transmission of adiposity.
Maternal BMI is a stronger predictor
of childhood and adolescent obesity,
compared with paternal obesity.247
Maternal obesity more than doubles
the risk of adult obesity (see below).
Paternal obesity has been associated
with childhood and adolescent
obesity and has an additive effect to
maternal obesity.278
D.2.b. Maternal Weight Gain
Prepregnancy adiposity and weight
gain during pregnancy are
associated with neonatal, infancy,
and childhood adiposity.247 The
known effect of maternal weight on
the offspring led the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) to recommend
different ranges for weight gain
during pregnancy, varying from 12.5
to 18 kg for underweight women to
5 to 9 kg for women with obesity
(BMI > 30 kg/m2).279 Yet, between
1997 and 2007, almost half of
pregnant US individuals gained
more than the weight recommended
by the IOM.280
Excess maternal adiposity has been
suggested to affect fetal metabolic
programing and make the offspring
more vulnerable to the obesogenic
environment and increase the
risk of obesity. This effect was
illustrated in metabolic and
bariatric surgery studies, in which
children born to mothers with
obesity after gastric bypass
surgery had lower prevalence of
macrosomia and severe obesity at
adolescence, compared with their
siblings born before the mothers’
surgery.247 Fetal or infant
macrosomia and gestational
diabetes are some of the
complications associated with
maternal obesity and serve as risk
factors for later onset of obesity
and T2DM in the offspring.281
The exact mechanism by which
maternal obesity predisposes to
adverse outcomes in the offspring is
unclear. It has been suggested that
the pathways that are affected
control the central regulation of
appetite and insulin sensitivity and
cardiovascular regulation.281
Alteration of the fetal hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis function has
been implicated in programming the
metabolic syndrome of the offspring
of mothers with obesity.282
22
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 23]
D.2.c. Gestational Diabetes
Infants and children of mothers
with gestational diabetes mellitus
(GDM) have higher fat mass and
BMI than their counterparts whose
mothers did not have GDM.283
Adjusting for maternal BMI and
other potential confounders, GDM
was shown to be associated with
childhood obesity with odds ratio
of 1.6 to 2.8.284,285 The odds
of developing higher waist
circumference ($95th and
percentile) in children of mothers
with GDM was also found to be
higher after controlling for potential
confounders (OR, 1.55; 95% CI,
1.03–2.35).285 Sibling studies
controlling for shared genetics and
environment have shown higher
BMIs in offspring exposed to
diabetes in utero compared with
their unexposed siblings.286
Although the exact mechanisms of
the effect of GDM are not fully
understood, it has been postulated
that the effect may be mediated
through insulin. Pregnant women
with GDM have higher insulin
resistance compared with pregnant
women without GDM.287,288 It has
been suggested that maternal insulin
resistance and hyperglycemia causes
fetal hyperinsulinemia, resulting in
excessive fetal growth with
associated macrosomia and
increased adiposity.287 Maternal
hypertriglyceridemia from insulin
resistance has also been thought to
lead to increased adiposity and birth
size even when glucose levels are
well-controlled.289 Additionally,
maternal diabetes is associated with
increased leptin synthesis in the
offspring.290 Epigenetic changes in
infants of mothers with GDM is
another suggested mechanism,
affecting gene expression regulation
body fat accumulation or other
related metabolic pathways.291
D.2.d. Maternal Smoking
Exposure to ETS has been shown to
increase the prevalence of childhood
and adolescent obesity.292–294 A
systematic review and meta-analysis
reported an association between
prenatal ETS and childhood and
adolescent obesity; children exposed
to ETS in utero had about 1.9 times
greater risk of developing obesity,
compared with their nonexposed
counterparts.295 Prenatal exposure to
the risk from tobacco smoke can
occur both directly from smoking
mothers and indirectly through ETS,
although maternal smoking was found
to more strongly predict obesity.
Children exposed to smoking in
utero have a dose-dependent
increased risk of developing
overweight and obesity.296
D.3. Postnatal Risk Factors
As with the prenatal environment,
the postnatal environment is
important to the later development
of overweight and obesity. In
addition to epigenetic mechanisms,
behavioral habits begin to get set at
an early age. Acceptance of foods,
availability of high calorie foods,
establishment of the microbiome,
and early eating habits are only a
few of the proposed mechanisms for
postnatal factors to influence later
weight status.297
D.3.a. Birth Weight
Several studies have shown a
U-shaped or J-shaped distribution
between birth weight and adult
BMI.247 Infants with both low
(<2500 g) and high (>4000 g) birth
weight have been shown to have
higher risk of obesity, compared
with infants with birth weight
between 2500 and 4000 g.298 A high
BMI and central adiposity are more
prevalent among low-birth weight
infants.299 Maternal prepregnancy
weight and nutritional status are
strong predictors of neonatal
outcomes, with underweight
prepregnancy increasing the risk of
preterm birth and small-for-
gestational-age neonates.300
Maternal pregnancy overweight and
obesity are significantly associated
with large-for-gestational-age
babies.300
D.3.b. Early Breastfeeding Cessation
and Formula Feeding
Some, but not all, studies have
reported decreased risk of
childhood and adolescent obesity in
breastfed infants.247 The majority of
evidence is derived from
observational studies and may
include confounding effects.247 Some
studies have reported that,
compared with bottle-fed infants,
breastfed infants are better able to
regulate their energy intake and
have lower risk of childhood excess
weight gain.301 Other studies have
also shown that body weight gain is
slower in breastfed infants.247
Breastfeeding has been found to be
inversely associated with
overweight risk in the first year of
life, independent of maternal BMI
and SES. Breastfeeding cessation
before 6 months was associated
with an increased risk of rapid
weight gain and overweight by 12
months of age, compared with
exclusive breastfeeding.302
A systematic review of feeding
practices associated with rapid
infant weight gain found that certain
practices (such as overfeeding,
inappropriately concentrating
formula, placing infants in bed with
a bottle, or adding cereal to a bottle)
may lead to rapid infant weight
gain.303 In addition, infants fed high-
protein formulas are at greater risk
of elevated BMI later in
childhood.247,304
D.3.c. Rapid Weight Gain During
Infancy and Early Childhood
In resource-abundant countries,
rapid weight gain in infancy and
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
23
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 24]
during the first 2 years of life is
associated with higher risk of
obesity both in later childhood and
in adulthood.247,305 A systematic
review and meta-analysis found that
children who experienced rapid
weight gain from birth to age 2
were up to 3.6 times more likely to
have overweight or obesity in
childhood or adulthood, with the
relationship being stronger between
rapid infant weight gain and
childhood overweight or obesity.306
Therefore, rapid weight gain in
infancy and early childhood can be
viewed both as a risk factor for later
excess weight gain and also as a
signal, as mentioned previously, for
pediatricians and other PHCPs to
look for other underlying risk
factors and causes for excess weight
gain. For instance, early introduction
(at younger than 4 months of age)
of complementary foods has been
found to increase the risk of
childhood obesity in several
systematic reviews.307,308
D.3.d. Early Use of Antibiotics
Literature on antibiotic exposure in
early life (<2 years) is mixed, with
some suggestion that it may slightly
increase the risk of childhood and
adolescent obesity.309–312 The
association is stronger with
repeated antibiotic exposure,313,314
exposure within the first 6 months
of infancy,314 and broad-spectrum
antibiotic use.310 With similar
antibiotic exposure, boys appear to
be more susceptible to weight gain
than girls.295 Gut microbiota is
usually established during the first
years of life; it is hypothesized that
the effect of antibiotics is mediated
through the alteration of the gut
microbiome, which plays a role in
energy balance.
D.4. Childhood Risk Factors
Various medical conditions that
present in childhood and
adolescence are associated with the
development and progression of
overweight and obesity. Similarly,
certain behaviors established in
childhood and adolescence can
increase the risk of later
development of overweight and
obesity.
D.4.a. Endocrine Disorders
Endocrine disorders account for less
than 1% of all the causes of
pediatric obesity. These disorders
can be associated with endogenous
or exogenous glucocorticoid excess
(eg, Cushing syndrome, use of
corticosteroid medications). Short
stature or growth failure and
abnormally high BMI may result
from pseudohypoparathyroidism
type 1a, growth hormone deficiency,
or hypothyroidism.268,315
D.4.b. Children and Youth With
Special Health Care Needs Impacting
Nutrition and Physical Activity
D.4.b.1 Children With Developmental
and Physical Disabilities
A survey of data from NHANES, the
National Health Interview Survey,
and the National Survey of
Children’s Health found that
children with disabilities were from
27% to 59% more at risk for obesity
than children without disabilities.316
In addition to factors experienced by
children without disabilities, factors
that affect children with disabilities
that have been implicated in their
greater obesity risk are: more
difficulty breastfeeding,317 disrupted
appetite regulation,318 weight-gain
promoting medications,319,320 food
selectivity and sensitivity issues,321
behavioral disorders,322 physical
activity limitations,323 and use of
food rewards.316 A lack of adaptive
physical education or sports,324 and
specialized supervision and
instruction324 also play a role in
increasing obesity risk.
Furthermore, it is important to
consider that children with
disabilities are at a disadvantage
when it comes to obesity treatment
strategies that are tailored to their
needs. For example, most
community or school weight
management, nutrition or physical
activity interventions are not readily
adapted for children with
disabilities. Therefore, many
children with disabilities do not
have the support or strategies that
they need to address excess weight.
Finally, children may face bullying
or stigmatization and bias in school.
They may also receive unhealthy
incentives as rewards from
caregivers increasing their risk for
obesity. These systemic trends and
biases make providing adequate
care for children with disabilities
extremely difficult.
D.4.b.2 Children With Autism Spectrum
Disorder
Children and youth with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) have a
higher risk of developing overweight
or obesity. In the United States,
children and adolescents 2 to
18 years of age with ASD have a
43.7% greater risk of obesity
compared with their counterparts
without ASD.325 Although the exact
mechanisms through which ASD
increases the risk for excess weight
gain is unknown, a recent meta-
analysis of international studies
showed that positive moderators to
this association include children of
certain races and ethnicities, female
biological sex, increased age, and
living in the United States.325 This
meta-analysis did not control for
other risk factors for obesity,
however, such as use of antipsychotic
medications, food intake challenges,
or limited physical activity. Hence,
the variable of race could be
reflective of a negative SDoH.
Several etiological factors have been
postulated to contribute to the
24
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 25]
association between ASD and
obesity, including: genetic variants
(eg, 16p11.2 deletion and
microdeletion 11p14.1),326,327
prenatal exposure to certain
infections or medications,328,329
pre and postnatal exposure to
toxins,330,331 maternal diabetes,332
maternal obesity,333 intrauterine
growth restriction and preterm
birth,334,335 food selectivity,336,337
and physical limitations.338,339
D.4.b.3 Children With Myelomeningocele
Several studies report increased
rates of obesity of children with
myelomeningocele,340–342 with
children having more severe disease
tending to have higher BMIs.340
Children and adolescents with
myelomeningocele have increased
total body fat343 and lower energy
expenditure,342 compared with
children without myelomeningocele.
Risk factors for obesity in this
population include limited ambulation,
sedentary lifestyle, decreased lean
body mass, and reduced resting
energy expenditure.344 In addition,
children with myelomeningocele may
be less likely to have routine weight
and height, and primary care
providers’ discussions may be lacking
with respect to addressing healthy
lifestyles.
D.4.c.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder
A systematic review and meta-
analysis showed significant
association between attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) and obesity among
unmedicated individuals with
ADHD—but not among medicated
individuals.345 The prevalence of
obesity was found to be 40% higher
among children and adolescents
with ADHD, compared with those
without ADHD. This association is
not affected by gender or by study
setting, country, or quality. Causality
between ADHD and obesity could
not be inferred from this meta-
analysis, because the studies were
cross-sectional; however, some
prospective studies have shown that
ADHD precedes the diagnosis of
obesity.346,347
Some of the known symptoms of
ADHD may contribute to weight
gain. For example, binge eating,
which is a manifestation of
impulsivity in individuals with
ADHD, may result in increased
energy intake. Inattentiveness,
another symptom of ADHD, may
lead to lack of planning, or of
following through on a plan,
resulting in missed meals or the
consumption of unhealthy meals and
snacks.348 Other psychiatric
comorbidities that are often
associated with ADHD—such as
depression, anxiety, and circadian
rhythm disturbances—may also be
risk factors for obesity.348
Dopamine plays an important role in
some of the addictive behaviors of
ADHD and obesity. Functional MRI
studies have identified shared
neuropsychiatric circuits that are
associated with reward, response
inhibition, and emotional regulation
in obesity, ADHD, and abnormal
eating behavior.348
D.4.d. Weight-Promoting Appetitive
Traits
Differences in children’s appetitive
traits manifest as early as infancy
(for example, suckling behavior) and
may become more pronounced
when children get exposed to an
obesogenic food environment.217
Although the exact reasons why
some children have better control of
their energy intake is unknown,
interaction between genetic
predisposition and children’s early
environment may explain some of
the individual differences in
appetitive traits. Parent feeding
style, as discussed, has been shown
to be of importance.217
Systematic review and meta-analysis
of adult data showed a positive
association between eating quickly
and higher BMI,349 and in
longitudinal studies, faster eating
rate was associated with excess
weight gain.349 Similarly, 2 cross-
sectional pediatric studies have
reported a positive association
between eating fast and childhood
and adolescent obesity.350,351 Eating
quickly has been suggested to result
in greater energy intake.
A recent American Heart Association
policy statement on caregiver
influences on young children’s
eating behaviors synthesized
appetitive traits consistently
associated with child adiposity. In
addition to more rapid eating pace,
these traits include eating in the
absence of hunger, high enjoyment of
food, low responsiveness to satiety,
and low level of restrained eating.352
D.4.e. Medication Use
Medications within many categories
have been associated with weight
gain. The magnitude of risk associated
with medication use is not fully
known; therefore, there is an urgent
need for more research in this area
as well as mediating strategies.
Medications implicated include
glucocorticoids, sulfonylureas, insulin,
thiazolidinediones, antipsychotics,
tricyclic antidepressants, and
antiepileptic drugs.353–356 In particular,
second-generation antipsychotics
(ie, risperidone, clozapine, quetiapine,
and aripiprazole) can lead to rapid
weight gain and comorbidities such as
prediabetes, diabetes, and
dyslipidemia.357,358
A recent review discusses the more
commonly prescribed medications in
children and adolescents with
obesity and comorbidities, and
offers suggestions on alternative
therapeutic agents (Table 3).359
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
25
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 26]
D.4.f. Depression
Children with obesity are more
likely to have anxiety and
depressive symptoms compared
with their peers of healthy weight. It
is not clear whether obesity is a risk
factor for these symptoms.360,361
Some earlier research reported
bidirectional associations between
obesity and depression and anxiety.
Limitations of some of the studies
included small samples; self-
reported data on anthropometry;
assessment of symptoms based on
self-administered questionnaires;
and not controlling for potential
confounders, such as family
history, neuropsychiatric disorders,
and SES. A more recent study
showed that obesity was a risk
factor for anxiety and depression
among children and adolescent
after adjusting for SES,
neuropsychiatric disorders, and
family history of anxiety or
depression.362
The association between obesity and
depression and anxiety may be
attributable to interactions and shared
pathophysiological mechanisms
between these conditions.363,364 Some
of the shared risk factors include
genetic, physiologic, and
environmental factors. Obesity is
associated with subclinical
inflammation and oxidative stress,
which have been shown to be
important etiological factors for
depression, and this has been
suggested as possible common link
between obesity and depression.363
Other factors that can potentially
impact the association between
obesity and anxiety and depression
include sleep disturbance, unhealthy
diet, physical activity, antior bullying of
children/or bullying of children.
IX. EVALUATION OF THE PEDIATRIC
PATIENT WITH OVERWEIGHT OR
OBESITY
A. Evaluation of Patients With
Overweight or Obesity
This evaluation is an important part
of COT (see COT section in the
Treatment section). As with all
chronic diseases, a complete history,
review of systems (RoS), and
physical examination are important
for treatment. Specific elements of
both history and physical relating to
obesity are of special importance.
Evaluation of the patient and
family’s readiness to change
behavior is critical to effectively
TABLE 3 Selected Examples of Commonly Prescribed Medications and Weight Gain in Pediatric
Practice359
Medication
Obesogenic Medications
Nonobesogenic Medications
Allergies and asthma management
 antihistamines
 steroids (systemic)
 inhaled nasal steroids
 montelukast
Antidepressants
 amitriptyline
 nortriptyline
 paroxetine
 sertraline
 bupropion
 imipramine HCL
 buspirone
 trimipramine maleate
 citalopram
 protriptyline HCL
 desipramine HCL
 trazadone
 venlafaxine
 doxepin
 escitalopram
 ﬂuoxetine
 ﬂuvoxamine
Antiepileptics
 carbamazepine
 gabapentin
 pregabalin
 valproate
 vigabatrin
 felbamate
 lamotrigine
 levetiracetam
 phenytoin
 topiramate
 zonisamide
Antipsychotics
 aripiprazole
 clozapine
 haloperidol
 mirtazapine
 olanzapine
 perphenazine
 quetiapine
 risperidone
 sertindole
 thioridazine
 ziprasidone
 molindone
 pimozide
Anxiolytics
not applicable
 alprazolam
 lorazepam
Migraine management
 amitriptyline
 atenolol
 divalproex sodium
 ﬂunarizine
 gabapentin
 imipramin
 nortriptyline
 pizotifen
 propranolol
 lamotrigine
 levetiracetam
 protriptyline
 timolol
 topiramate
 zonisamide
Mood stabilizers and antimania
 carbamazepine
 gabapentin
 lithium
 valproate
 lamotrigine
 topiramate
 zonisamide
Psychostimulants
not applicable
 amphetamine
 methylphenidate
 dextroamphetamine sulfate
This is not an exhaustive list; it is included as an example of medications that may result in weight gain and possi-
ble alternatives.
26
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 27]
help with obesity treatment (see
algorithm in Appendix 1).
The early and accurate classification
of overweight and obesity and
identification of obesity-related
comorbidities is fundamental to the
provision of timely and appropriate
treatment (see the Comorbidities
section, below). The routine
classification of weight status allows
for early recognition of abnormal
weight gain. This is particularly
important because patients—including
children and adolescents—often do
not perceive overweight and obesity
as a health problem.366 Caregivers,
families, pediatricians, other pediatric
health care providers, and other
health care providers367 can also be
slow to recognize abnormal weight
status, even in the presence of severe
obesity.368,369
Patients and caregivers identify
pediatricians and other PHCPs as
trusted and preferred sources of
information about weight status,370
starting with discussions of feeding
practice in infancy and continuing
with evaluation of healthy nutrition
and activity into adulthood.
Pediatricians and other PHCPs are
also uniquely qualified to evaluate
patients for overweight, obesity, and
related comorbidities.
Routine well-child checks (WCCs) in
the medical home are an opportune
time for the evaluation of a child or
adolescent with overweight and
obesity, but this can occur during
problem-focused visits as well. When
the discussion of weight status is
normalized and nonstigmatizing, the
family and provider can exit a WCC
or other visit with a clear and
practical plan to improve health and
quality of life. Successfully and
sensitively treating overweight and
obesity can be highly rewarding for
both the family and the pediatrician
(or other pediatric health care
provider), because families suffering
from overweight and obesity often
have experienced previous shaming
or negative experiences with
treatment.28,371
Shaming of children with regard to
their weight may happen at school
and even at home in misguided
efforts to “motivate” the child to
adopt healthier behavior. Overt or
subtle and unintended bias in
health care leads to adverse health,
behavioral, and psychological
outcomes.61 In addition, when
feeding practices are identified as
unhealthy, parents may feel
blame. It is important, although
challenging, for pediatricians and
other PHCPs to communicate
support and alliance with children,
adolescents, and parents as they
diagnose and guide obesity
treatment.62
In the AAP statement on obesity
bias, steps to provide supportive
and nonbiased behavior include
recognition of the complex genetic
and environmental influences on
obesity. Recommendations include
use of neutral words like “BMI” or
“excess weight” rather than “fat” or
“chubby,” use of people-first
language (ie, “a child with high
weight” or “a child with obesity”
rather than “an overweight child” or
“an obese child”), an office set-up
that accommodates different body
sizes, and a private weighing
station.28 Ongoing successful
communication of support and
empathy during obesity treatment is
essential to reduce the effect of
weight bias, because families will
not continue to seek help if they
experience stigma.372,373
B. Medical History
Both a complete medical history and
physical examination are necessary
to evaluate any patient with a
chronic disease. Obesity is no
exception and, like other chronic
diseases, requires comprehensive
evaluation in certain areas of both
the history and physical
examination, which may require
additional time to that which is
allocated in a routine visit. The
medical history includes the chief
complaint, history of the present
illness, and family history.

The chief complaint is notable for
determining whether overweight
and obesity is a concern for the
KAS 2. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate children 2 to 18 y of age with overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile) and obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) for obesity-
related comorbidities by using a comprehensive patient history, mental and behavioral health screening, SDoH evaluation, physical examination, and diagnostic studies.
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
Early detection and treatment can reduce future serious sequelae, detection of comorbidity may motivate
treatment engagement.
Risks, harm, costs
Increased anxiety, overtesting, time needed for counseling, potential false-negative or false-positive tests, costs
of tests.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Potential to identify and manage comorbidities that have short and long term serious sequelae exceeds
potential harm especially for high-risk patients.
Intentional vagueness
Frequency of evaluation, patient level of risk.
Role of patient preferences
Family history, families’ concern about the test, ease and accessibility for testing must be considered.
Exclusions
#24 mo old.
Strengths
Strong recommendation.
Key references
80, 365
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
27
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 28]
patient and family. An open-
ended question such as “What
concerns, if any, do you have
about your child’s growth and
health?” can provide a wealth of
insight on this issue.

The history of the present illness
provides a more comprehensive
picture of the trajectory of
overweight and obesity. Starting
with an inquiry about maternal
weight gain during pregnancy
and prenatal factors that predis-
pose to obesity, and then moving
on to childhood and later adoles-
cent factors that predispose to
obesity, the pediatrician or other
pediatric health care provider
can glean valuable information
on causes and therefore manage-
ment for a particular patient’s
obesity. These prenatal and post-
natal causes are described in de-
tail in the Risk Factors section.
Information about the onset of
excess weight gain and consis-
tency of weight status over time
(including a review of the growth
curve and previous weight con-
trol attempts) can provide an un-
derstanding of what weight
status represents for the patient.
It can also offer clues as to root
causes, necessary diagnostic eval-
uation, and potential therapeutic
targets.

The family history focuses on
obesity-related comorbidities and
potential genetic causes of
obesity in addition to other
family health problems. A family
history of obesity and obesity-
related comorbidities may
influence both evaluation and
treatment. Although shared
environment, SDoHs, and stress
can contribute to obesity within
the same family, a family history
of obesity can also provide a clue
to genetic susceptibility to
obesity—especially if the family
history includes severe obesity
resulting in metabolic and bariatric
surgery or severe obesity present
in multiple family members and
generations.

The medication history should
be complete and should include
medications associated with weight
gain, such as antipsychotics, espe-
cially atypical antipsychotics; anti-
depressants including selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors;
TABLE 4 Special Considerations in the Review of Systems for the Patient With Overweight or Obesity
System
Symptom
Possible Obesity-Related Causes
General
Poor or slowed linear growth velocity
Endocrinologic contributor (eg, hypothyroidism, Cushing
syndrome)
Hyperphagia from early childhood, developmental delay,
obesity onset under age 5 y, or syndromic features
Various genetic etiologies (see Table 2, genetic syndromes
associated with obesity)
Respiratory
Shortness of breath
Obesity-related asthma phenotype, deconditioning
Snoring, apnea, disordered sleep
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
Gastrointestinal
Asymptomatic vague abdominal pain
NAFLD, NASH
Heartburn, dysphagia, chest pain, regurgitation
Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease
Abdominal pain, enuresis, encopresis, anorexia
Constipation
Right upper quadrant pain
Gall bladder disease
Hyperphagia
Prader-Willi, other genetic causes
Endocrine
Polyuria, polydipsia
Diabetes mellitus (DM) type 1 or 2
GYN
Oligomenorrhea, dysfunctional uterine bleeding
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Orthopedic
Hip, thigh, or groin pain, painful or uneven gait
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE)
Knee pain
SCFE, Blount disease
Foot pain
Increased weight bearing
Back pain
Increased weight
Proximal muscle wasting
Cushing syndrome
Mental health
Sadness, depression, anhedonia, body dissatisfaction,
school avoidance, poor self-image
Depression or anxiety, bullying, sexual, physical, or
emotional abuse
Impulsive eating, distractibility, hyperactivity
ADHD
Purging, restricting intake, binge-eating, night eating
Disordered eating or eating disorders
Flat affect
Depression or anxiety
Urinary
Nocturia, enuresis
DM, OSA
Dermatologic
Rash
Intertrigo
Darkened skin on ﬂexural surfaces
Acanthosis nigricans
Pustules, abscesses
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Hirsutism in females
PCOS
Flesh-colored striae
Rapid weight gain
Purplish striae
Cushing syndrome
Skin fold irritation
Candida
Neurologic
Morning headaches
OSA
Daytime sleepiness
OSA
Persistent headache
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH)
Adapted from Krebs et al.14
28
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 29]
steroids; anticonvulsants; antihy-
pertensives; birth control agents,
including injected forms; and medi-
cations used in diabetes mellitus.
Table 4 summarizes the RoS and
provides a valuable framework for
investigating a variety of obesity-
related conditions.
B.1. Social History
A thorough social history is helpful
in the evaluation of the child or
adolescent with overweight and
obesity. An understanding of family
living arrangement will identify
resources and barriers that are
unique to the patient and their
family. Factors such as eating
routines and schedules; eating at
multiple households; and eating
environments, such as family meals,
eating at a table, eating with or
without screens, are all important
elements in assessing contributors
to and potential treatment targets
for excess weight gain. Determining
a family’s relationship with food is
also important (eg, Is food a
common reward? How is food used
in celebrations? Is there pressure
for the child to eat?).
Because overweight and obesity
tends to cluster in social groups as
well as families,374 discussions of
neighborhood, school, and friend
groups can guide pediatricians,
other PHCPs, and families to
productive areas for treatment.
Social history can heighten an
awareness of, and provide insight
into, patients who are most exposed
to negative SDoHs. Given that
inequities exist in obesity risk
factors, an SDoH evaluation is
important to increase awareness
and provide insight in identifying
patients who are more vulnerable to
obesity. Assessment of SDoHs is also
important to contextualize the
patient’s and family’s treatment
challenges. Standardized tools for
use in primary care exist and
include the Safe Environment for
Every Kid model375 and the
Accountable Health Communities
Health-Related Social Needs
Screening Tool.376
Being alert to and recognizing
SDoHs are the initial steps in
trauma-informed care (TIC). ACEs
can have a profound impact on
health over a lifetime and, as noted,
include stressors as diverse as harsh
parenting, food insecurity, and
parental incarceration. These factors
can trigger physiologic
abnormalities that increase a
patient’s risk for obesity, cancer, and
numerous other diseases. TIC is
characterized by screening and
recognition of these ACEs,
responding to them, and working to
prevent reexposure to trauma.
Initial recognition of the importance
of ACEs on health occurred in the
field of adult obesity treatment. The
importance of TIC and addressing
ACEs in pediatric obesity
management is ongoing.68,377,378
B.2. Nutrition and Physical Activity
History
Gathering a nutrition history and
physical activity history often takes
the form of a patient and/or
caregiver completing a healthy
habits survey before seeing the
pediatrician or other pediatric
health care provider (Table 5).
Electronic health records, waiting
room kiosks, and emailed previsit
surveys can all be used to help
gather this information.
There are many additional tools to
assess nutrition and physical activity.
These include: 24-hour recalls,
electronic and written food diaries,
telephone- and text-prompted diaries,
and various smartphone applications
that track food intake. Pedometers and
other wearable activity monitors can
assist with physical activity
assessment. Pediatricians and other
PHCPs may find some of these
applications and tools at their disposal.
Cultural dietary habits, limited
English proficiency, and limited
literacy levels may influence the
accuracy of the tool used. In
comparison with adults, physical
activity assessment is challenging,
because children and adolescents
are less reliable in performing recall
of performed activity.379 And,
because of the greater burden of
overweight and obesity on people of
certain race and ethnicities, these
differences should be acknowledged
and any limitations should be
TABLE 5 Assessment Components
Dietary Intake Can Be Addressed by Assessing the Following:
Physical Activity Can Be Addressed by Assessing Physical Literacy379:
Eating outside the home
Physical literacy: The motivation, conﬁdence, physical competence, knowledge, and
understanding to engage in age-appropriate physical activity for a lifetime. Routine
ambient activity is built into daily living.
Consumption of sweet drinks
Sedentary time, especially recreational screen time.
Portion size
Moderate activity levels, characterized by a mild increase in pulse and respiratory
rate but still able to talk.
Meal habits, including skipping meals
Vigorous activity levels, characterized by increased breathing, elevated heart rate, or
sweating.
Snack habits
Fruit and vegetable consumption
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
29
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 30]
mitigated. An example of a healthy
habit survey can be found at https://
mainehealth.org/-/media/lets-go/
files/childrens-program/
pediatric-family-practices/
full-healthcare-toolkit.pdf. Sensitivity
to cultural, economic, and literacy
barriers is necessary with the
nutrition history and physical activity
history, as with other assessments.
Furthermore, the presence of eating
disorders, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, and other mental health
conditions may preclude the use of
certain tools that require intensive
tracking.
B.3. Assessments for Behavioral Health
and Disordered Eating Concerns
Because rates of behavioral health
illnesses are greater in patients with
obesity than other patients, it is
important for pediatricians and
other PHCPs to evaluate the
emotional health of children with
overweight and obesity.380 A
common comorbidity of obesity in
children is weight-based bullying
and teasing.28,43 If a patient
responds affirmatively when asked
if they have ever been teased or
bullied about their weight,
pediatricians and other PHCPs can
consider provision of resources
(such as those found at
stopbullying.gov) to the child and
parent as well as local counseling
referral.
Various in-office tools can be used
to address behavioral health
disorders seen in greater prevalence
in patients with obesity. Overall
behavioral functioning can be
assessed through the Pediatric
Symptom Checklist’s parent or teen
versions.381 Evaluation for
depression can be conducted
through the teen version of the
Patient Health Questionnaire 2- or
9- question version.382 Assessment
of anxiety by tests such as the
General Anxiety Disorder
assessment or the Screen for Child
Anxiety Related Disorders
assessment.383,384 In addition, ADHD
can be assessed by the Vanderbilt
ADHD Rating Scales.385,386
As discussed in the AAP clinical
reports, “Preventing Obesity and
Eating Disorders in Adolescents”387
and “Identification and
Management of Eating Disorders in
Children and Adolescents,”388
adolescents with obesity may
engage in unhealthy practices to
lose weight. These practices include
skipping meals, using diet pills or
laxatives, and inducing vomiting.
Therefore, it is important for
pediatricians and other PHCPs to
evaluate the adolescent with
overweight or obesity for these and
other related behaviors, and to
examine the growth chart for
evidence of more rapid than
expected decline in BMI.
As noted in the clinical reports
above, pediatricians “should be
knowledgeable about the variety of
risk factors and early signs and
symptoms of eating disorders in
both male and female children and
adolescents. Pediatricians should
evaluate patients for disordered
eating and unhealthy weight-control
behaviors at annual health
supervision visits. Pediatricians
should evaluate weight, height, and
BMI by using age- and sex-
appropriate charts, assess menstrual
status in girls, and recognize the
changes in vital signs that may
signal the presence of an eating
disorder.”388 For more information
on this evaluation, please see the
AAP clinical report.388
B.3.a. Physical Evaluation
A complete physical examination is
necessary in the patient with
overweight and obesity because of
the disease’s complex and
multisystem effects. The 2015
article “Physical Examination
Findings Among Children and
Adolescents with Obesity: An
Evidence-Based Review,” by
Armstrong et al provides a
thorough explanation of special
considerations for patients with or
at-risk for weight-related illness.365
Pediatricians and other PHCPs are
encouraged to reference this AAP-
published review. The physical
exam also requires focused
attention to certain obesity-related
findings related to physical
evaluation (Table 6). These include:

Vital signs such as heart rate,
pulse, and blood pressure should
be taken; blood pressure should
be measured accurately with an
appropriately sized cuff.87

Other important signs: short
stature may be a sign of a genetic
or endocrinologic cause for
overweight and obesity. Flat affect
may indicate depression, and
anxious mood may indicate
anxiety. Attention-seeking may
be a signal for underlying
distress over overweight and
obesity. Syndromic features may
also offer indications of the
presence of an underlying genetic
cause for obesity.

Skin examination should be
performed to look for intertrigo
and hidradenitis suppurativa
associated with excess skin folds
as well as acanthosis nigricans
associated with insulin resistance.
Flesh-colored striae may be
seen on the abdominal wall
and/or thighs as an indication
of rapid weight gain. The
combination of purplish
abdominal striae, slowed linear
growth, cervicodorsal fat
accumulation, proximal muscle
wasting, full facies, and hyperten-
sion should prompt evaluation
for Cushing syndrome.

Examination of the head, ears, eyes,
nose, and throat should occur to
look for papilledema associated
with pseudotumor cerebri, tonsillar
hypertrophy associated with sleep
30
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 31]
TABLE 6 Physical Examination Findings in Children and Adolescents With Obesity
Physical Examination Finding
Definition
Other Causes and Differential
Vital signs
Hypertension
SBP or DBP $ 95th percentile on at
least 3 readings
Numerous, including essential, stress-
induced, renal parenchymal or
vascular disease, cardiovascular
disorders, obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome, substance abuse or
medication side effect,
pheochromocytoma, anemia,
hyperthyroidism, Cushing
syndrome, Williams syndrome,
Turner syndrome
Increased HR
Heart rate above upper limit of
normal for age
Numerous, including fever, anemia,
drugs, anxiety, pain, arrhythmia,
myocarditis, substrate deﬁciency,
hypovolemic shock, sepsis,
anaphylaxis, toxic exposure,
hyperthyroidism, Kawasaki disease,
acute rheumatic fever,
pheochromocytoma
Anthropometric
Changes in height velocity
Early height velocity increase
True pattern characteristic of obesity,
but early height increases can also
be: familial tall stature, precocious
puberty, gigantism, pituitary gland
tumor
Changes in weight gain
Early weight gain before age 5 y
Genetic causes, overfeeding
Earlier onset of peak height velocity
Slowing of height can be attributable
to medications, inﬂammatory
bowel disease, hypothyroidism,
hypercortisolism, dysplastic or
genetic syndrome, constitutional
delay, growth hormone deﬁciency
Slowing of height age 8–18 y
HEENT
Papilledema
Edema of the optic disc secondary to
increased intracranial pressure
(Frisen scale)
Intracranial mass lesion,
hydrocephalus, cerebral venous
thrombosis, medications,
autoimmune disorders, anemia,
and cranial venous outﬂow
abnormalities
Dental caries
White, brown, or black spots
(noncavitary) or eroded areas of
enamel or dentin (cavitary)
Developmental disease of the tooth
and gum, trauma, infection
Tonsillar hypertrophy
Tonsils occupy at least 50% of the
oropharynx (Brodsky classiﬁcation
31 and 41).
Infectious causes
Chest
Gynecomastia
>2 cm of breast tissue in biological
males
Hyperaromatase syndrome;
hypogonadism, hyperprolactinemia,
chronic liver disease, and
medications, particularly H2
antagonists
Cervicodorsal hump
Fibrous fatty tissue over the upper
back and lower neck
Endogenous (Cushing syndrome) or
exogenous corticosteroid exposure,
adrenal carcinoma, adrenal
adenoma; HIV with secondary
hyperinsulinemia
Gastrointestinal
Liver enlargement (hepatomegaly)
Liver span >5 cm in 5-y-olds and 15
cm in adults or liver edge
palpable below the right costal
margin by >3.5 cm in adults or
>2 cm in children
Multiple, including hepatitis, storage
disorders, inﬁltrative, impaired
outﬂow, and biliary tract disorders
Genitourinary
Buried penis
Suprapubic fat accumulation leading
to the appearance of a shortened
penile shaft
Trapped penis, webbed penis, and
micropenis
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
31
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 32]
apnea and goiter associated with
thyroid disease.

A cardiopulmonary examination
should be performed to look for a
spectrum of impairment that can
be associated with overweight and
obesity. Simple deconditioning may
present with tachypnea, dyspnea,
or tachycardia. Wheezing may be
suggestive of intrinsic or exercise-
induced asthma. Tonsillar hypertro-
phy may be a sign that increases
TABLE 6 Continued
Physical Examination Finding
Definition
Other Causes and Differential
Musculoskeletal
Gait
Collapse into hip (“waddle”),
Trendelenburg or antalgic gait
(external rotation or out-toeing on
affected side)
Arthritis, SCFE
Lordosis
Trunk sway associated with postural
adaptations
Spondylolisthesis, achondroplasia,
muscular dystrophy, other genetic
conditions
Hip pain and/or limp
Knee or hip pain, subacute onset,
pain with external rotation of hip
Multiple problems present with
chronic hip, knee, or thigh pain
including slipped capital femoral
epiphysis (SCFE), growing pains,
femoral neck fracture, groin injury,
Perthes disease, osteonecrosis
associated with systemic disease,
juvenile idiopathic arthritis,
reactive arthritis, overuse injuries,
chondrolysis, tumors, osteitis pubis
Genu varum or valgum
Genu varum (bow legs)
Tibia vara (Blount disease), rickets,
skeletal dysplasia, celiac sprue,
collagen disorder and
hypermobility syndromes (eg,
Marfan syndrome), Loeys-Dietz,
classic Ehler Danlos syndrome)15
Genu valgum (knock-kneed)
Physiologic in children under 6 y; in
older children and adolescents,
consider postaxial limb deﬁciency,
neoplasms, genetic and metabolic
disorders, neuroﬁbromatosis, and
vitamin D–resistant rickets
Pes planus
Rigid versus ﬂexible, sometimes with
pain
Posterior tibial tendon insufﬁciency,
tarsal coalition, congenital vertical
talus, rheumatoid arthritides,
trauma, neuropathy
Skin
Acanthosis
AN is thickened and darker skin,
occasionally pruritic at the nape of
the neck (99%), axillae (73%) and,
less commonly, groin, eyelids,
dorsal hands, and other areas
exposed to friction
Medication side effect, and
uncommonly, visceral malignancy.
Hirsutism or acne
Hirsutism: familial, Cushing syndrome,
thyroid disorders
Acne: physiologic, folliculitis, rosacea
Striae
Linear, usually symmetrical smooth
bands of atrophic skin that initially
appear erythematous, progressing
to purple then white;
perpendicular to the direction of
greatest tension in areas with
adipose tissue
Pregnancy, Cushing syndrome, and
topical corticosteroid use
Intertrigo
Macerated, erythematous plaques in
skin folds
Inﬂammatory diseases, metabolic
disorders, malignancies (rare in
pediatrics), and various infections
by site
Pannus
Excess skin and subcutaneous fat
below the umbilicus
Pregnancy, malignancy
Adapted from Table 4 and used with permission by Armstrong et al. et al.365 HEENT, head, eye, ear, nose, and throat examination.
32
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 33]
the likelihood of sleep apnea. In
more severe obesity, congestive
heart failure may present with bas-
ilar rales or other signs of more
significant cardiac disease.

Liver size should be assessed by
palpation and auscultation. If
present, right upper quadrant
tenderness should be noted.

Genito-urinary examination
should be performed to assess
pubertal status and genital
appearance looking for signs of
endocrine or genetic abnormality.
Hypogonadism may be present in
certain syndromes associated
with obesity or be a result of
obesity.389,390 More commonly,
biological males with abdominal
obesity may have a suprapubic
fat pad obscuring the penis, a
so-called “vanishing penis,” and
need instruction on proper voiding
and genital hygiene to avoid devel-
opment of skin breakdown.

Neurologic evaluation may reveal
papilledema, as described above,
as well as paresthesia.

Orthopedic findings associated
with obesity include abnormal
gait, knee tenderness, pes planus,
genu valgum (“knock knees”),
genu varum (leg bowing), foot
pain, back tenderness, and hip
pain. Obesity may also make
detection of scoliosis more difficult.

Neuromuscular evaluation of
obesity, as with the orthopedic
evaluation of obesity, includes
assessment of bone structure, gait
and pain, but also includes assess-
ment for balance, coordination,
lower limb muscle strength, flexi-
bility and motor skill proficiency.
Patients with obesity frequently
experience impairment in these
areas. Such limitations can result
in further reduction of ability to
engage in physical activity.391
C. Assessment of Patient Readiness
to Change
“Readiness to change” refers to a
patient’s interest in changing a
behavior (Importance) and their
belief that they can bring about this
change (Confidence). This evaluation
is important when discussing
healthy nutrition and activity with
patients who have BMI in the
healthy range; it assumes even
greater importance with a patient
and family who are struggling with
overweight, obesity, or severe
obesity where health concerns are
elevated. This evaluation of
readiness to change is central to
deciding how and when to embark
on obesity treatment. Motivational
interviewing (MI), discussed in the
Treatment section, provides a useful
framework for evaluating and
discussing a patient’s readiness to
change.392
Readiness to change, perceptions of
weight status, health challenges,
nutrition habits, and access to
physical activity are influenced by
familial, cultural, and socioeconomic
factors. For this reason,
understanding these factors is
beneficial in forging a productive
relationship with children and their
families. It is also important to
remember that patients and families
care about their health and their
child’s health regardless of race,
ethnicity, and/or SES. Caregivers
should be reminded that the
presence of overweight or obesity is
NOT an indication of poor parenting.
D. Laboratory Evaluation
Based on BMI classification—and
augmented by findings in the
history, physical examination, and
patient readiness to change
assessments—laboratory evaluation
of the patient represents the next
important step in evaluation. This
laboratory evaluation and its
connection to the delineation of
more common comorbid illnesses is
described in the Comorbidities
section. Other laboratory evaluations
can be performed as clinically
indicated.
X. COMORBIDITIES OF PEDIATRIC
OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY
Introduction to Comorbidities
Children and adolescents with obesity
have increased prevalence of
comorbidities, and a greater risk for
obesity in adulthood, morbidity, and
premature death.36,393–395 The risk for
obesity-related comorbidities increases
with age and severity of obesity and
prevalence varies by ethnicity and
race.396 For example, there is a higher
prevalence of NAFLD in Hispanic
children and a lower prevalence in
Black children.397,398 AI/AN, Black, and
Hispanic youth have higher prevalence
of prediabetes and diabetes, compared
with white youth.399,400 Pediatricians
and other PHCPs need to recognize
that the association between ethnicity
and race and obesity and related
comorbidities in both children and
adults likely reflects the impact of
epigenetic, social, and environmental
factors, such as SDoHs, low SES,
exposure to structural racism,
neighborhood deprivation, and
inadequate built environment in these
subpopulations.399,401–408
Obesity and related comorbidities
should be evaluated concurrently
with an obesity-specific history and
review of systems, family and social
history, physical examination, and
laboratory testing. This evaluation
provides pediatricians and other
PHCPs with an opportunity to assess
for both the etiology and
complications of obesity (see the
Evaluation section). Pediatricians
and other PHCPs need to take into
consideration patient-specific factors
that may increase the risk for
comorbidities. For example,
prediabetes and diabetes occur
more frequently among children
who are 10 years and older, are in
early pubertal stages, or have a
family history of T2DM.399,400,409
There is compelling evidence that
obesity increases the risk for
comorbidities and that weight loss
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
33
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 34]
interventions can improve
comorbidities.80,396,410 Thus, the
recommendations for comorbidity
evaluation uses input from the
technical report on comorbidities
for the prevalence, age, and weight
category396 associated with
comorbidities, and the technical
report on treatment of obesity
intervention outcomes on
dyslipidemia, prediabetes and
diabetes, HTN, and NAFLD.80 Studies
on optimal age, frequency, benefits,
and harms of evaluating for
comorbidities for children with
obesity remain limited. To address
when to begin evaluation, what tests
to obtain, and frequency of testing,
input from other clinical practice
guidelines was also
considered.87,88,90,411,412
The KASs in this section are limited
to comorbidities addressed in the
technical reports and/or guidelines
from professional organizations
or societies. Consensus
recommendations are included to
cover the breadth of relevant
comorbidities associated with
pediatric overweight and obesity
and to provide context for
implementation. Each KAS or
consensus recommendation is
drawn from the technical reports, an
extensive review of the literature,
and clinical guidelines or position
statements from premier
organizations or professional
societies in the field. The inclusion
criteria for the guidelines and
position statements are in Table 7.
When there was more than 1
guideline from the same
organization or professional
society, the most recent guideline
was given precedence. Other
considerations for inclusion were
guidelines supported by a technical
report or endorsed by the AAP.
The following section is divided into
3 sections:

Overall KASs for Laboratory
Evaluation of Obesity-Related
Comorbidities for children
with overweight and obesity
(KASs 3–3.1);

Concurrent Treatment of Obesity
and Obesity-Related Comorbidities
(KAS 4); and

Specific Recommendations for
Evaluation for Common Comorbid-
ities (KASs 5–8) and Guidelines
for Other Comorbidities.
Recommendations for reevaluation
and initial management of
common comorbidities are in
Appendix 3.
A. Laboratory Evaluation of Obesity-
Related Comorbidities for
Children With Overweight and
Obesity
The 2007 AAP Expert Committee on
Child Obesity recommended
laboratory evaluation for children
with obesity for dyslipidemia,
prediabetes, and NAFLD starting at
10 years by obtaining a fasting lipid
panel, fasting glucose, alanine
transaminase, and aspartate
transaminase levels every 2 years.92
For children with overweight, the
recommendation was only for a
fasting lipid panel unless additional
risk factors were present (such as
family history of obesity-related
diseases, elevated BP, elevated lipid
levels, or tobacco use).14 KASs 3 and
3.1 build on the 2007
recommendations—taking into
account recent studies, guidelines,
and pediatrician and other PHCP
behaviors—while balancing the
harm versus benefit of evaluation at
the individual and population levels.
TABLE 7 Inclusion Criteria for Guidelines or Position Statements Reviewed for Comorbidities
Inclusion Criteria
 Clinical guideline or position statement was published in the last 15 y.
 The organization or professional society is recognized as the leading scientiﬁc expert in the ﬁeld.
 The clinical guideline or position statement uses an established grading matrix to assess the
evidence.
KAS 3. In children 10 y and older, pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate for lipid abnormalities, abnormal glucose metabolism, and abnormal liver function in children and
adolescents with obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) and for lipid abnormalities in children and adolescents with overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile).
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade B.
Beneﬁts
Allows for early detection and management to reduce risk factors for future cardiometabolic disease. Result
will guide treatment. May motivate treatment engagement.
Risks, harm, costs
Cost, access, patient anxiety, labeling with chronic medical condition, stress, and time of undergoing treatment.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Identiﬁcation and management of cardiometabolic comorbidities in childhood and adolescence exceeds
potential harm, especially for high-risk patients.
Intentional vagueness
Age.
Role of patient preferences
Parent and patient knowledge, family history, families’ concern about the test, ease and accessibility of testing
should be considered.
Exclusions
<24 mo old.
Strengths
Strong.
Key references
80, 86, 88, 90, 396, 397, 413–416
34
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 35]
Children $10 Years
To encourage a pragmatic and
efficient evaluation strategy, KAS 3
and 3.1 recommend that, for
children with obesity, evaluation for
lipid abnormalities, abnormal
glucose metabolism, and liver
dysfunction be obtained at the same
time and begin at age 10 years. The
expectation is that pediatricians and
other PHCPs will find it easier to
adhere to recommendations when
all tests are obtained at the same
time. They may order fasting
laboratory tests for the evaluation,
because a fasting lipid panel is still
the recommended test to evaluate
for dyslipidemia for children and
adolescents with overweight and
obesity (see the dyslipidemia
section, below, for additional
information).
Children 2–9 Years
For children 2 to 9 years of age with
obesity, evaluation for lipid
abnormalities may be considered
(KAS 3.1). This recommendation
aligns with the 2011 National Heart
Lung Blood Institute (NHLBI) Expert
Panel on Integrated Guidelines for
Cardiovascular Health and Risk
Reduction in Children and
Adolescents.86 In population-based
studies, lipid abnormalities occur in
children younger than 10 years,
with higher rates among children
with obesity.80,395,417 High
triglycerides (TG) and low high-
density lipoprotein (HDL) levels (the
typical pattern of dyslipidemia that
occurs with obesity) have been
reported in children with obesity as
young as 3 years.395
As the risk profile for NAFLD and
diabetes mellitus in children
younger than 10 years is lower
(especially in the absence of severe
obesity), obtaining tests for
abnormal glucose metabolism or
liver function is not universally
recommended for this
population.88,90,415,418
Detailed and specific
recommendations are provided in
the following sections on
dyslipidemia, prediabetes and
diabetes mellitus, and NAFLD.
Children With Overweight
For children 10 years and older with
overweight, evaluating for lipid
abnormalities is recommended in
the absence of additional risk
factors (KAS 3).86,412 For evaluation
of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM),
additional risk factors need to be
considered, which include: family
history, history of gestational
diabetes, signs of insulin resistance
(such as acanthosis nigricans), and
use of obesogenic psychotropic
medication.90,358,419 For NAFLD,
additional risk factors include family
history of NAFLD, central adiposity,
signs of insulin resistance,
prediabetes or diabetes mellitus,
dyslipidemia, and sleep apnea.88
Considerations for Testing
Among children with obesity, there
is clustering of comorbidities, a
higher risk profile for more severe
disease and/or progression than
may be commonly or previously
recognized.396,421–423 For example,
regardless of the definition used for
metabolic syndrome, the prevalence
is 0% to 4.7% among children with
healthy weight and increases to 14.5%
to 35% among children and
adolescents with obesity.396 In a
cohort of 675 children with NAFLD
from 12 clinical centers across the
United States, one-third had T2DM or
prediabetes,422 2 conditions that have
significant morbidity in childhood.
Adolescents with severe obesity—who
have comparable BMI and metabolic
profiles as adults—are more likely to
present with advanced liver damage
and severe systemic inflammation,
suggesting that pediatric NAFLD may
be more aggressive.424 Similarly, in
T2DM, children have a more rapid
rate of progression of islet b cell
failure and dysglycemia compared
with adults.425–427
Concerns about overtesting and cost
are warranted but are balanced by the
significant impact of obesity and
KAS 3.1 In children 10 y and older with overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile), pediatricians and other PHCPs may evaluate for abnormal glucose metabolism and liver
function in the presence of risk factors for T2DM or NAFLD. In children 2 to 9 y of age with obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile), pediatricians and other PHCPs may evaluate for lipid
abnormalities.
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade C.
Beneﬁts
Limit evaluation to populations with increased risk. Allows for early detection and management to reduce risk
factors for future cardiometabolic disease. Result will guide treatment.
Risks, harm, costs
Cost, access, patient anxiety, labeling with chronic medical condition, stress, and time of undergoing treatment.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Identiﬁcation and management of cardiometabolic comorbidities in childhood and adolescence may exceed
potential harm, especially children at increased risk.
Intentional vagueness
Age. Need for testing may vary by condition and individual presentation.
Role of patient preferences
Parent and patient knowledge, family history, families’ concern about the test, ease and accessibility of testing
should be considered.
Exclusions
<24 mo old.
Strengths
Moderate.
Key references
80, 86, 88, 90, 358,396, 397, 413–415, 420
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
35
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 36]
comorbidities on morbidity and
mortality. Almost half (43%) of
children and adolescents with obesity
have at least 1 abnormal lipid level,417
and 1 in 5 US adolescents have
prediabetes,423 which are both
precursors for future cardiometabolic
disease. Although the prevalence of
T2DM in children is low, at
approximately 1%, the incidence has
increased from 9 in 100 000 in 2002
to 13.8 in 100 000 in 2015, a
worrisome annual percentage change
of 4.8%.399 NAFLD is considered one
of the most common chronic liver
diseases in children88,397,398,428 and
occurs more frequently in male
children, older children, and Hispanic
children.397,429
Finally, although obesity prevalence
rates continue to rise, the rate of
evaluating for obesity or comorbidities
in practice is low—suggesting that
any concerns about overtesting are
likely to be more theoretical than
real.3,394,430–432
See Appendix 3 for information
on frequency of testing for
comorbidities.
B. Concurrent Treatment of Obesity
and Obesity-Related
Comorbidities
There is substantial evidence to
support concurrent treatment of
obesity and comorbidities to achieve
weight loss, avoid further weight gain,
and improve obesity-related
comorbidities. The majority of studies
reviewed in the technical report on
comorbidities396 demonstrate an
association between overweight and/
or obesity, severity of obesity, and
higher prevalence of comorbidities.
Studies also report improvement in
comorbidities with intensive lifestyle
treatment, weight loss medication,
and/or bariatric surgery.80,126,438
Specifically, cardiometabolic markers
improved significantly in children with
obesity who underwent intensive
pediatric obesity treatment of 3 to
6 months, which provides an
opportunity for clinicians to
emphasize health outcomes of lifestyle
management.80,410,439 Interventions
that meet the intensity or “dose”
threshold of 26 hours or more over 2
to 12 months can lead to clinically
significant improvements in BMI,79
and decreases in BMI can lead to
clinically meaningful improvements in
comorbidities.440–444
Guidelines for dyslipidemia, T2DM,
NAFLD, and HTN all recommend
lifestyle treatment of the primary
management of the
comorbidity.86–88,90,414,415,419,420
Although the specific dietary
recommendation may differ slightly
(eg, CHILD-1 and 2 for dyslipidemia,
low-glycemic diet for prediabetes,
limiting sugary beverages for NAFLD,
and a Dietary Approaches to Stop
Hypertension [DASH] Diet for elevated
BP), there is overlap between the
dietary recommendations and all
comorbidities improve with weight
stabilization and reduction.80,410,436
Children are often seen at least once
a year for WCCs, at which the
pediatrician or other pediatric
health care provider reviews the
growth chart, provides anticipatory
guidance on growth, feeding,
nutrition, sedentary screen time,
and participation in physical
activity. At a minimum, the WCC can
include evaluation for comorbidities
for children with overweight and
obesity, and anticipatory guidance
on risk for comorbidities with
increasing BMI or obesity. It may be
helpful for pediatricians and other
PHCPs to include the diagnosis of
obesity to the problem list to
heighten awareness and remind
providers to address weight
concerns at subsequent clinic
encounters.445,446 In a large adult
study, documentation of an obesity
diagnosis on a problem list was
independently predictive of at least
5% weight loss.445 To avoid any
harmful effects related to potential
weight bias and stigma, however,
pediatricians and other PHCPs need
to be mindful of how this diagnosis
is conveyed to the child and/or
caregiver.28
There may also be a potential
benefit for improved weight
outcomes with comorbidity
evaluation. In adult studies,
identifying obesity-related
comorbidities has been shown to be
a motivating factor to address
weight concerns.447–449 The
evidence in pediatrics is, however,
KAS 4. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should treat children and adolescents for overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile) or obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) and
comorbidities concurrently.
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade A
Beneﬁts
Awareness of relationship between comorbidities and weight status, treating weight improves comorbidities.
Improved continuity of care and outcomes. Provides an opportunity to discuss health.
Risks, harms, costs
Anxiety about weight or comorbidities, time needed for education counseling, potential for disordered eating.
Health care costs.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Beneﬁts exceed potential harm.
Intentional vagueness
Pediatricians and other PHCPs may not have access to appropriate subspecialists.
Role of patient preference
Increased visit time, patient or parent experience with prior weight-related counseling.
Exclusions
<24 mo.
Strength
Strong.
Key references
80, 86–88, 90, 396, 410, 414, 415, 419, 420, 433–437
36
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 37]
sparse and inconsistent.434,450
Adolescents identify a desire for
improved health as a primary
motivation for change.451 Another
study analyzed clinic records of
4000 youth aged 10 to 18 years
with overweight or obesity in an
academic primary care network and
found that youth who were
evaluated (n 5 2815) with a
glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c)
had a decrease in BMI-z slope per
year after the HbA1c test compared
with similar peers (n 5 2087) who
had not been evaluated. Among
those who had an HbA1c test, the
decline in BMI-z slope per year was
greater for youth with HbA1c in the
prediabetes-range.434 An earlier
study with a similar pediatric clinic
population but a smaller sample size
(n 5 128) did not find a positive
effect on BMI change following
cholesterol evaluation.450 There is a
need for more studies before
definitive conclusions can be
reached about whether evaluating
families for comorbidities increases
engagement, adoption of healthy
choices, and weight loss or has
unintended negative effects.
C. Specific Guidelines for Initial
Evaluation for Comorbidities
The following sections provide
specific recommendations on initial
comorbidity evaluation. Guidance on
repeat evaluation and initial
comorbidity management may be
found in Appendix 3.
C1. Dyslipidemia
Children and adolescents with
overweight and obesity have
increased prevalence of abnormal
lipid levels.396 The combination of
hypertriglyceridemia and low high-
density lipoprotein (HDL) levels,
driven largely by underlying insulin
resistance, is the most common type
of dyslipidemia seen with
overweight and obesity. Children
and adolescents with overweight
and obesity can also have elevated
total cholesterol and low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) levels.86 NHANES
data from 2011 to 2014 showed
that prevalence of abnormal lipid
level was 3 times higher among
children and adolescents with
obesity, compared with those with a
healthy BMI (43% vs 14%).417
Studies indicate that cardiovascular
risk factors track from childhood
into adult life and that lifestyle
treatments can improve outcomes
with respect to these risk
factors.393,413,452 Being aware of the
association of these “silent”
cardiovascular comorbidities with
overweight and obesity—as well as
their persistence into adulthood
with potential serious health
consequences—obliges pediatricians
and other PHCPs to perform
laboratory testing, educate patients
and families about the long-term
risks of cardiovascular disease and
provide nutrition and activity
counseling.
This KAS is supported by both the
2011 NHLBI Expert Panel on
Integrated Guidelines for
Cardiovascular Health and Risk
Reduction in Children and
Adolescents and 2018 American
Heart Association and American
College of Cardiology Guidelines,
which recommend evaluation for
early risk of atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease and
counseling on risk-reduction
behaviors in children and
adolescents.86,411 Evaluation for
dyslipidemia with obesity is
recommended for younger children,
as well as for children 10 years and
older. Although data are limited in
young children, 1 population-based
study showed that 10% of children
with obesity aged 3 to 5 years have
elevated TG and low HDL levels.395
In addition to obesity, other risk
factors for dyslipidemia include
cigarette use, HTN, diabetes, and a
family history of cardiovascular
disease in a first- or second-degree
relative (#55 years for males and
#65 years for females) with a history
of myocardial infarction, sudden death,
or HTN.86,437 All of these conditions
KAS 5. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate for dyslipidemia by obtaining a fasting lipid panel in children 10 y and older with overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th
percentile) and obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) and may evaluate for dyslipidemia in children 2 through 9 y of age with obesity.
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade B: Children $10 y of Age With Obesity. Grade C: Children 2 Through 9 y of Age
Beneﬁts
Allows for identiﬁcation and management of speciﬁc cardiovascular risk factors, fasting status limits number of
blood draws. May motivate treatment engagement.
Risks, harms, costs
Convenience, cost, access, patient anxiety, labeling with chronic medical condition, stress and time of undergoing
treatment.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Identiﬁcation and management of speciﬁc cardiometabolic comorbidities in childhood and adolescence exceeds
potential harm of no evaluation, especially for high-risk patients. When obtaining a fasting lipid panel is not
possible, the pediatrician or other PHCP may assess the beneﬁt of evaluating for dyslipidemia with a nonfasting
lipid panel in certain circumstances.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient preference
Ease and accessibility of testing; families concern about the test.
Exclusions
#24 mo old.
Strength
Strong (10 y and older). Moderate (2–9 y).
Key references
80, 86, 395, 396, 410, 411, 417, 453, 454
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
37
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 38]
warrant laboratory evaluation and
may help guide clinical decisions for
assessment of dyslipidemia in younger
children. Additionally, awareness of an
association of social factors, specifically
ACEs, with cardiovascular risk factors
is important.455
C.1.a. Laboratory Tests for Diagnosis
of Dyslipidemia
The NHLBI expert panel
recommends a fasting lipid panel for
evaluation of dyslipidemia for
children with overweight and
obesity.86 Because dietary fats and
carbohydrates (particularly simple
sugars) increase serum TG
concentrations, 8 to 12 hours of fasting
before testing is recommended.456
Given that a combination of high TG
and low HDL cholesterol is the most
common pattern of dyslipidemia
observed in children with overweight
and obesity, the recommendation to
obtain a fasting lipid panel is
important, because nonfasting TG
levels will not be accurate.86
For practical purposes, a nonfasting
lipid panel using the non-HDL level
may be easier to obtain for routine
evaluation in the primary care setting.
The non-HDL level is the total
cholesterol minus the HDL cholesterol
level. If the non-HDL cholesterol level
is abnormal (non-HDL $145 mg/dL)
and/or the HDL level is <40 mg/dL, a
fasting lipid panel needs to be
obtained for diagnosis.412 The
nonfasting lipid panel is
recommended for all children 9 to
11 years of age to evaluate for
familial hypercholesterolemia.86
Estimates are that approximately
25% of children would be referred
for a fasting lipid panel because of
elevated non-HDL lipid
evaluation.457 Because of the
elevated risk of lipid abnormality
among youth with overweight and
obesity, a fasting lipid panel is
recommended. See the
implementation guide for
additional information.
The cut-off criteria for lipids in the
2011 NHLBI guidelines are the same
across different age groups, except for
triglycerides, as indicated in Table 8.
See Appendix 3 for information on
frequency of laboratory testing and
information about initial
management of dyslipidemia.
C.2. Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes
Mellitus
T2DM is now increasingly diagnosed
in the pediatric population. Between
2002 and 2015, the incidence of
T2DM among 10- to 19-year-olds in
the United States increased from 9.0
to 13.8 per 100 000.290,399,458 Based
on the 2005 to 2016 NHANES, 1 in 5
adolescents (12–18 years) have
prediabetes.423 Although uncommon,
T2DM has been diagnosed in children
younger than 10 years, some as
young as 4 years of age.459,460 For
this reason, pediatricians and other
PHCPs should consider risk factors
and symptoms of altered glucose
metabolism in all ages (eg, polydipsia,
polyphagia, polyuria, blurred vision,
unexplained weight loss).
Because obesity is a strong
predictor for developing
prediabetes and T2DM,423,461,462
pediatricians and other PHCPs need
to have an increased index of
suspicion when caring for children
with obesity, especially in the
presence of other risk factors
(Table 9).90,408,414,415,463 Both
genetics and SDoHs account for
some of the racial and ethnic
disparities observed in the
incidence of T2DM.401,408
The pathogenesis of prediabetes and
T2DM is a peripheral and hepatic
resistance to insulin accompanied by
progressive loss of islet cell function.
TABLE 8 NHLBI Criteria for Lipid Testing Results
Lipid Category
Low (mg/dL)
Acceptable (mg/dL)
Borderline High (mg/dL)
High (mg/dL)
Total cholesterol
—
<170
170–199
$200
LDL cholesterol
—
<110
110–129
$130
HDL cholesterol
<40
>45
—
Triglycerides
0–9 y
—
<75
75–99
$100
10–19 y
—
<90
90–129
$130
Non-HDL cholesterol
—
<120
120–144
$145
Adapted from the Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health.86 —, not applicable.
TABLE 9 Other Risk Factors for Prediabetes and T2DM90,358,415,419
Risk Factors
 Maternal history of diabetes or gestational diabetes
 Family history of diabetes in ﬁrst- or second-degree relative
 Signs of insulin resistance or conditions associated with insulin resistance (acanthosis puberty nigricans, hypertension, dyslipidemia, polycystic ovary
syndrome, or small-for-gestational-age birth weight)
 Use of obesogenic psychotropic medications
38
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 39]
Insulin resistance, when assessed by
the homeostatic model assessment
of insulin resistance test, varies
across weight categories, with
highest levels observed among
children with severe obesity.396
Some children with T2DM have
rapidly progressive disease, which
underscores the need for early
identification and intensive
treatment in collaboration with a
pediatric endocrinologist.425
C.2.a. Laboratory Tests for the
Diagnosis of Prediabetes and T2DM
Testing for T2DM should always be
performed if there is suspicion of
hyperglycemia in a patient with
symptoms and signs of
hyperglycemia, such as new onset
thirst (polydipsia), frequent
urination (polyuria) or new onset
bedwetting, excessive hunger and
eating (polyphagia), blurred vision,
unexplained or unexpected weight
loss, or fatigue.
Diagnostic tests for prediabetes and
T2DM are fasting plasma glucose
(FPG), 2-hour plasma glucose after
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT),
and HbA1c.90 There are several
clinical guidelines that do not
recommend one test over the other
for evaluation.90,268,415,416,419,420,465
Pediatricians and other PHCPs need
to be aware of the strengths and
shortfalls of each test and take
patient preferences and test
accessibility into consideration. In
addition, the concordance between
all 3 tests is imperfect.416 For
instance, the FPG is highly
reproducible; the OGTT, which does
not fare as well on reproducibility,
is effective in identifying
dysglycemia. This is a good reason
to use the OGTT as a confirmation
test if the initial test result is
equivocal.466–470 The OGTT,
however, may not be readily
available at some medical settings,
requires fasting before the test, lasts
at least 2 hours, and includes an
unpalatable glucose drink—all of
which are factors that can limit its
use in pediatric outpatient settings
as an evaluation test.
The HbA1c test is easy to obtain as
fasting is not required. It provides a
measure of chronic hyperglycemia,
and use of the test has been
shown to increase evaluation for
T2DM in primary care settings.471
It is also the recommended
test for monitoring
prediabetes.90,414–416,418,464,472 The
sensitivity of HbA1c for diagnosing
diabetes is lower in children473
when compared with adults.473,474
Pediatricians and other PHCPs also
need to be aware that HbA1c levels
can be 0.1% to 0.2% higher in
individuals with iron deficiency
anemia.475,476
Fasting insulin is not recommended
for diagnosis of prediabetes or T2DM
because the levels are highly variable
KAS 6. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate for prediabetes and/or diabetes mellitus with fasting plasma glucose, 2-h plasma glucose after 75-g oral glucose tolerance test
(OGTT), or glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c).a
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade B.
Beneﬁts
Tests sensitive for glucose intolerance have established diagnostic cut-offs.
Risks, harms, costs
Cost, access, time, patient anxiety with testing, varying levels of sensitivity and speciﬁcity, concordance between
tests is imperfect, HbA1c levels can vary by age, ethnicity, anemia or hemoglobinopathies.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Beneﬁt outweighs harm.
Intentional vagueness
Consideration for patient access and timing of tests.
Role of patient preference
Families’ concern about developing T2DM, concerns about the test, ease and accessibility for testing, length of
time for OGTT.
Exclusions
Fasting insulin test is not reliable measure of insulin resistance.
Strength
Moderate.
Key references
90, 414–416, 464
a Per KAS 3 and 3.1: pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate children 10 y and older with obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) for abnormal glucose metabolism and may evalu-
ate children 10 y and older with overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile) with risk factors for T2DM or NAFLD for abnormal glucose metabolism. (Refer to evidence
tables for KAS 3 and 3.1.)
TABLE 10 Criteria for Diagnosing Prediabetes and T2DM90
Prediabetes or Impaired Glucose Tolerance
Diabetes Mellitusa
Fasting plasma glucose (FBG)b
100–125 mg/dL
$126 mg/dL
2-h plasma glucose (OGTT)c
140–199 mg/dL
$200 mg/dL
Random plasma glucose (RBG)d
Not applicable
$200 mg/dL
HbA1ce
5.7% to 6.4%
$6.5%
a In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia, diagnosis is conﬁrmed if 2 different tests are above threshold or a single test is above threshold on 2 separate occasions.
b Fasting for at least 8 h with no calorie intake.
c Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) using a load 1.75 g/kg of body weight of glucose with a maximum of 75 g.
d In patients with hyperglycemic crises or classic symptoms of hyperglycemia (eg, polyuria, polydipsia).
e Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) is the preferred test for monitoring prediabetes.478
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
39
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 40]
and do not reliably correlate with the
level of insulin resistance.268,477
The cut-off values are similar for
pediatric and adult populations, as
illustrated in Table 10, above. If the
results are unequivocally high and
indicative of T2DM, obtaining a
second or repeat confirmatory test
is not recommended; instead,
treatment should be initiated.90,415
Guideline recommendations for
tracking glycemic control over time
use the HbA1c test; however, the
FPG can be substituted using the
cut-off criteria in Table 10. See the
implementation guide for further
discussion on use of OGTT or FBG
tests.90,414,415,419,464
See Appendix 3 for more information
on frequency of evaluation and on
initial management of prediabetes
and T2DM.
C.3. Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
NAFLD is a chronic liver disease
marked by steatosis (fat
accumulation), inflammation, and
fibrosis. The underlying
pathogenesis is insulin resistance,
which alters the process of fat
oxidation in the liver, increasing
oxidative stress and inflammation—
with resultant liver damage. Among
children with obesity, rates as high
as 34% have been reported.429
Three diagnostic terms are used to
describe the histology of the disease
progression: NAFLD, nonalcoholic
fatty liver (NAFL), and nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH). NAFLD refers
to the whole spectrum of the
disorder, from mild steatosis to
cirrhosis of the liver. NAFLD is
divided into steatosis (NAFL) and
steatohepatitis (NASH). In NAFL, the
milder form of the condition, there is
fatty infiltration in $5% of the liver,
with or without fibrosis. In NASH,
there is inflammation, steatosis, and
fibrosis with ballooning injury to the
hepatocytes.433
The risk profile and natural history
of the disorder in the pediatric
population are still evolving, given
that there are limited long-term
studies in children. Pediatric NAFLD
may reflect the early onset of a
chronic disease with a more
aggressive course, particularly once
NASH has occurred.424,479
Preadolescent children with NAFLD
have higher rates of mortality over
20 years, compared with their peers
without NAFLD.479 Children with
increasing weight gain; higher levels
of alanine transaminase (ALT), c
glutamyl transferase (GGT), and
cholesterol at baseline; worsening
levels of HbA1c; and an incident
diagnosis of T2DM are more likely
to have severe disease or
progression (Table 11).433,479
However, in a recent study of
children 8 to 17 years of age with
biopsy-confirmed NAFLD who
received standardized nutrition and
exercise counseling consistent with
the 2007 AAP Expert
Recommendations at 12-week
intervals over 1 to 2 years, about
half demonstrated any improvement
in resolution of NASH or regression
of fibrosis. Among children with
borderline or definite NASH,
resolution occurred in about one-
third. Adolescents were more likely
to develop worsening steatosis and
less likely to experience any
resolution of NASH or regression in
fibrosis than younger children.433
C.3.a. Laboratory Tests for Diagnosis
of NAFLD
The 2017 North American Society of
Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Hepatology and Nutrition
(NASPGHAN) clinical practice
guidelines recommend ALT as the
preferred test for NAFLD.88 ALT is
more specific for liver disease than
aspartate transaminase (AST), easily
accessible at laboratory centers,
minimally invasive relative to other
testing modalities for NAFLD, and has
been used most often in pediatric NAFLD
studies. Higher levels of ALT correlate
KAS 7. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate for NAFLD by obtaining an alanine transaminase (ALT) test.a
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade A.
Beneﬁts
Minimally invasive, fair correlation to histology.
Risks, harms, costs
Test may not correlate with disease severity.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Beneﬁt outweighs harm.
Intentional vagueness
Future research needed.
Role of patient preference
None.
Exclusions
Not applicable.
Strength
Strong.
Key references
88, 396, 481
a Per KAS 3 and 3.1: Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate children 10 y and older with obesity (BMI $
95th percentile) for abnormal liver function and may evaluate children 10 y and older with overweight (BMI $ 85th
percentile to <95th percentile) with risk factors for TD2M or NAFLD for abnormal liver function. (Refer to evidence
tables for KAS 3 and 3.1.)
TABLE 11 Risk Factors for Diagnosis and Progression of NAFLD88,397,433
NAFLD
Risk Factorsa
Diagnosis
Male sex, $10 y, obesity, sibling with NAFLD, prediabetes or diabetes mellitus, obstructive sleep apnea, dyslipidemia
Progression
Adolescent $14 y; higher or increasing alanine transaminase; elevated baseline aspartate transaminase, c glutamyl transferase
(GGT), and LDL cholesterol; prediabetes or diabetes mellitus; obstructive sleep apnea; increasing wt or waist circumference
a Consideration should be given to groups of certain races/ethnicities with higher rates of NAFLD (eg, Hispanic, Asian), for which higher prevalence can be attributed to genetic,
socioeconomic, and environmental factors.480
40
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 41]
with more advanced liver disease with
steatosis and fibrosis; however, a normal
ALT does not definitively exclude
NAFLD.429 In a population of children
older than 10 years with overweight and
obesity who were referred from a
primary care clinic, an ALT level $80
IU/L had a sensitivity of 57% and a
specificity of 71% for NASH.481
Elevations in AST and GGT, especially at
baseline, can be indicative of severe
disease or rapid progression.433,481
NAFLD is less common in children
younger than 10 years. In an autopsy
study of 742 children, 3.3% of 5- to 9-
year-old children had fatty liver,
compared with 11.3% in 10- to 14-
year-olds and 17.3% in 15- to 17-year-
olds.397 There is a higher risk for
NAFLD in young children 2 to 9 years
of age who have severe obesity,
however.88 Thus, pediatricians and
other PHCPs may consider evaluating
NAFLD by obtaining an ALT level every
2 years in these children.
See Appendix 3 for more
information on the frequency of
evaluation for NAFLD and on
managing NAFLD.
C.4. Hypertension
The prevalence of HTN among
children and adolescents with
overweight and obesity ranges from
5% to 30%, with higher prevalence
with increasing BMI percentile.396
Children with excess weight also
have abnormal diurnal variation in
BP. One-third of children with
obesity have a decreased nocturnal
BP dip, increasing the potential risk
for end-organ damage.482 Among
children with obesity, additional
cardiometabolic risk factors—such
as insulin resistance or
dyslipidemia—may affect BP,
independent of obesity.
Studies indicate that HTN during
childhood and adolescence increases
the risk for adult HTN and
cardiovascular disease.483–485 More
concerning, studies have shown that,
among children with obesity, HTN is
associated with vascular changes,
increased left ventricular mass, and
carotid intima media thickness
during childhood.486,487 These
findings support the importance of
evaluating for HTN early and
consistently throughout childhood
and adolescence among individuals
with overweight and obesity.413,488
C.4.a. Evaluation for HTN
Obesity is the strongest risk factor
for HTN in childhood.87,488 Elevated
BP is observed in early childhood
and prevalence increases with age
and BMI category.396 A large study
conducted in primary care settings
found that 8% of children 3 to
5 years of age with obesity had
elevated BP levels; the percentage
increased to 20% among children
11 to 15 years of age.489 HTN
prevalence varies by race and
ethnicity, with highest prevalence
occurring among non-Hispanic Black
and Hispanic youth.490 SES is also a
risk factor for HTN,491 as are
adverse childhood experiences, both
prenatally and during childhood.87
These factors may contribute to the
higher prevalence of hypertension
observed among non-Hispanic Black
and Hispanic youth.490
Pediatricians and other PHCPs
should obtain a history of salt intake
(eg, addition of salt while cooking
and/or at meals) and sources of
sodium from processed, frozen, and
fast foods, because high sodium
intake is associated with childhood
HTN. Obtaining a history of physical
activity and inactivity levels is also
recommended, because decreased
activity levels are associated with
childhood HTN.87 Finally, evaluation
of sleep duration and disordered
breathing are recommended because
of the association between abnormal
sleep duration and OSA and elevated
BP.492,493
This KAS aligns with the 2017 AAP’s
“Clinical Practice Guideline for
Screening and Management of High
Blood Pressure in Children and
Adolescents,” which recommends
evaluation of elevated BP and HTN
for children with obesity at every
clinic visit beginning at 3 years of
age.87 Frequent monitoring of BP
among children with overweight and
KAS 8. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate for hypertension by measuring blood pressure at every visit starting at 3 y of age in children and adolescents with overweight (BMI $
85 to <95th percentile) and obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile).
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade C
Beneﬁts
Early detection of HTN, opportunity to address weight’s impact on BP and health, prevention of HTN-related
morbidity.
Risks, harms, costs
Improper measurement techniques, misclassiﬁcation, discomfort, time needed, possible inaccuracy during acute
care visits when patient may be in pain.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Beneﬁts exceed potential harm.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient preference
Increased visit time, discomfort with cuff.
Exclusions
<3 y of age.
Strength
Moderate.
Key references
87, 396, 413, 453, 488
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
41
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 42]
obesity fosters earlier detection of
elevated BP.
C.4.b. Diagnosis of HTN
In 2017, the AAP published a CPG
on HTN that included
recommendations for evaluation for
elevated BP and updated HTN
definitions of “elevation,” “stage 1
BP,” and “stage 2 BP” (see Table 12).
This CPG recommended that an
elevated initial BP measurement
($90th percentile), taken either by
oscillometry or auscultation, should
be repeated twice with auscultation
and averaged, at the same visit, to
determine accurate BP
measurement and category. For
diagnosis, BP by auscultation should
be repeated with confirmed elevated
BP measurements on 3 separate
clinic visits for elevated BP and
stage 1 HTN, and on 2 separate
visits for stage 2 HTN.87
TABLE 12 BP Categories by Age and Number of Visits Needed for Diagnosis
BP Category
Children 1–13 Years of Age
Children $13 Years of Age
Number of Visits to Diagnosis
Normal
BP < 90th percentile
BP <120/80 mm Hg
NA
Elevated
BP $ 90th percentile to <95th percentile
120/<80 to 129/<80 mm Hg
3
Stage 1
BP $ 95th percentile to <95th percentile 1 12 mmHg
130/80 to 139/89 mm Hg
3
Stage 2
BP $ 95th percentile 1 12 mm Hg
$140/90 mm Hg
2
Used with permission and adapted from the AAP HTN CPG,87 Fig 2, and AAP Pediatric Obesity Clinical Decision Support Chart.494 NA, not applicable.
TABLE 13 Summary of KASs for Evaluation of Comorbidities Among Children and Adolescents With Overweight and Obesity
KAS #
Key Action Statement (KAS)
Evidence Quality, Recommendation Strength
A. laboratory evaluation of obesity-related comorbidities
3
In children 10 y and older, pediatricians and other PHCPs should
evaluate for lipid abnormalities, abnormal glucose metabolism,
and abnormal liver function in children and adolescents with
obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) and for lipid abnormalities in
children and adolescents with overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile
to < 95th percentile)
B, Strong
3.1
In children 10 y and older with overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to
< 95th percentile), pediatricians and other PHCPs may evaluate
for abnormal glucose metabolism and liver function in the
presence of risk factors for T2DM or NAFLD. In children 2 to 9 y of
age with obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile), pediatricians and other
PHCPs may evaluate for lipid abnormalities.
C, Moderate
B. Concurrent treatment of obesity and obesity-related comorbidities
4
Pediatricians and other PHCPs should treat children and adolescents
for overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to < 95th percentile) or
obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) and comorbidities concurrently.
A, Strong
C. Evaluation for diagnosis of dyslipidemia, prediabetes, T2DM, NAFLD, and hypertension
5
Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate for dyslipidemia by
obtaining a fasting lipid panel in children 10 y and older with
overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to < 95th percentile) and
obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) and may evaluate for dyslipidemia
in children 2 through 9 y of age with obesity.
B, Strong (10 y and older); C, moderate (2–9 y of age)
6
KAS 6. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate for prediabetes
and/or diabetes mellitus with fasting plasma glucose, 2-h plasma
glucose after 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), or
glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c).a
B, Moderate
7
KAS 7. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate for NAFLD by
obtaining an alanine transaminase (ALT) test.b
A, Strong
8
Pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate for hypertension by
measuring blood pressure at every visit starting at 3 y of age in
children and adolescents with overweight (BMI $ 85 percentile to
< 95th percentile) and obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile).
C, Moderate
a Per KAS 3 and 3.1: pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate children 10 y and older with obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) for abnormal glucose metabolism and may evalu-
ate children 10 y and older with overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile) with risk factors for T2DM or NAFLD for abnormal glucose metabolism. (Refer to evidence
tables for KAS 3 and 3.1.)
b Per KAS 3 and 3.1: pediatricians and other PHCPs should evaluate children 10 y and older with obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) for abnormal liver function and may evaluate
children 10 y and older with overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile) with risk factors for TD2M or NAFLD for abnormal liver function. (Refer to evidence tables
for KAS 3 and 3.1.)
42
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 43]
BP measurements should be taken
with an appropriately sized cuff; the
bladder length should be 80% to
100% of the circumference of the arm,
and the width should be at least 40%
of the arm circumference.87 (See
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
nhanes/nhanes_07_08/manual_an.pdf.)
For children and adolescents with
excess weight, a larger cuff size may
be required to obtain accurate
measurements. For children and
adolescents with severe obesity, a
thigh cuff may be needed.
Additionally, for children and
adolescents with obesity, ambulatory
blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) is
recommended to assess HTN severity
and identify possible abnormal
circadian BP patterns, which
increases risk for end-organ damage.
ABPM also helps to identify masked
HTN and/or “white coat” HTN.87
Elevated BP in the office setting is
unrecognized in approximately 25%
of cases.495 The AAP’s CPG on HTN
provides pediatricians and other
PHCPs with practical tools to assist
with identification of elevated BP
and HTN. Improved identification of
children at high risk and youth
allows for a thorough evaluation,
treatment, and follow-up, with the
goal of decreasing long-term
cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality.
See Appendix 3 for more
information on repeat evaluation for
HTN and on management of HTN.
Table 13 lists the KASs for the
comorbidities covered in the TR.
D. Other Comorbidities
D.1. Obstructive Sleep Apnea
OSA is a sleep disorder
“characterized by prolonged partial
upper airway obstruction and/or
intermittent complete obstruction
that disrupts normal ventilation
during sleep.”89 The condition is
associated with cardiovascular
complications, neurocognitive
impairment, and decreased quality
of life. Children with obesity have a
higher prevalence of OSA: 45%
among children obesity compared
with 9% among children with
healthy weight. One study indicated
that a 1-unit increase in the BMI SD
score increased the odds of having
OSA by a factor of 1.9 independent
of age, sex, tonsillar hypertrophy,
and asthma.441
Evaluation for OSA is based on
history of symptoms and
examination. Children with obesity,
tonsillar hypertrophy, craniofacial
anomalies, trisomy 21, and
neuromuscular disorders are at
higher risk for OSA. Common
symptoms include frequent snoring,
gasps or labored breathing during
sleep, disturbed sleep, daytime
sleepiness, inattention and/or
learning problems, nocturnal
enuresis, and headaches.
Examination findings may include
tonsillar hypertrophy, adenoidal
facies, micro- or retrognathia, high-
arched palate, and elevated BP.
Diagnosis is made by obtaining a
polysomnography, the gold
standard test, with an apnea-
hypopnea index of 1 or more
episodes per hour in children.496
Because of limited availability of
sleep centers with pediatric
expertise, referral to a pediatric
otolaryngologist for further
evaluation, diagnosis, and
management may be needed.
Consensus Recommendations
The CPG authors recommend
pediatricians and other PHCPs obtain:

A sleep history, including
symptoms of snoring, daytime
somnolence, nocturnal enuresis,
morning headaches, and inatten-
tion, among children and adoles-
cents with obesity to evaluate for
OSA.

A polysomnogram for children
and adolescents with obesity and
at least 1 symptom of disordered
breathing.
See Appendix 3 for more
information on the initial
management of OSA.
TABLE 14 Deﬁnitions and Criteria for PCOS
Definition
Diagnostic Criteria
National Institutes of Health
Requires the presence of:
1. Hyperandrogenism (clinical and/or biochemical)
2. Ovarian dysfunction
American Society of Reproductive Medicine (Rotterdam)
Requires the presence of at least 2 criteria:
1. Hyperandrogenism (clinical and/or biochemical)
2. Ovulatory dysfunction
3. Polycystic ovarian morphology
American Endocrine Society
Requires the presence of hyperandrogenism (clinical and/or biochemical) and either:
1. Ovulatory dysfunction
2. Polycystic ovarian morphology
Androgen Excess and Polycystic Ovary Syndrome Society
Requires the simultaneous presence of:
1. Hyperandrogenism (clinical and/or biochemical)
2. Ovarian dysfunction (ovulatory dysfunction and/or polycystic ovarian morphology)
All of the diagnostic criteria for PCOS require the exclusion of other disorders of adrenal excess, such as nonclassic or late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia, Cushing syn-
drome, hyperprolactinemia, hypothyroidism, acromegaly, premature ovarian failure, a virilizing adrenal or ovarian neoplasm, or a drug-related condition.
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
43
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 44]
D3. Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is
a heterogeneous disorder characterized
by hyperandrogenism and disordered
ovulatory function and is often
associated with obesity and insulin
resistance. The condition increases risk
for infertility, T2DM, cardiovascular
disease, and cancer.497
Four different sets of criteria have
been published for diagnosis of
PCOS in adults as outlined by
differing professional organizations
(Table 14).498 Establishment of
diagnostic criteria for PCOS in
adolescence has been difficult,
because characteristic features of
PCOS can be normal physiologic
events during early adolescence.499
International pediatric and
adolescent specialty societies have
made recommendations for
diagnosis specific to adolescents,
which include the following:
(1) evidence of clinical or
biochemical hyperandrogenism,
and (2) persistent irregular
menstrual cycles (<20 days or >45
days) 2 years after menarche.500
Limited data are available on
prevalence of PCOS in adolescents.
Estimates range from 3% to 11%,
depending on the criteria for
diagnosis.501
Evaluation for PCOS in an adolescent
requires first excluding other medical
conditions that may cause menstrual
dysfunction (oligomenorrhea or
amenorrhea) and/or signs of
androgen excess (acne, hirsutism, or
alopecia). Additionally, for
adolescents, evaluation should occur
2 years after menarche, because
irregular menstrual cycles are not
uncommon during this timeframe.
Laboratory testing may include:
17-hydroxyprogesterone, total
testosterone, free testosterone, sex
hormone-binding globulin,
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate,
androstenedione, luteinizing hormone,
follicle-stimulating hormone, estradiol,
prolactin, free thyroxine, thyroid
stimulating hormone, and insulin.
Interpretation of laboratory results
should be made in the context of age-
appropriate reference ranges;
therefore, referral to a laboratory that
can perform ultrasensitive pediatric
assays is recommended. Routine
ovarian imaging is not indicated for
the diagnosis of PCOS in
adolescents.498,502 An algorithm for
evaluation is provided in the
implementation materials from
previously published consensus
recommendations.503
See Appendix 3 for more
information on the initial
management of PCOS.
Consensus Recommendation
The CPG authors recommend
pediatricians and other PHCPs:

Evaluate for menstrual irregularities
and signs of hyperandrogenism
(ie, hirsutism, acne) among female
adolescents with obesity to assess
risk for PCOS.
D4. Depression
The relationship between pediatric
obesity and depression is less well
understood than the physical
comorbidities; however,
identification of depression is an
important component of the
assessment and management of
pediatric obesity, given its potential
impact on treatment outcomes.
A systematic review and meta-
analyses conducted in 2019 showed
that children 18 years and younger
with obesity have a 32% increased
odds of having or developing
depression compared with children
of healthy weight, with the highest
odds (44%) among females with
obesity.504
Studies are limited on the effect of
treatment of pediatric obesity on
depression. A recent meta-analysis
of 36 studies found a small but
significant reduction in depressive
symptoms following structured
pediatric obesity treatment. Notably,
no adverse mental health outcomes
were reported.505 Additionally, the
interventions technical report
indicates that obesity treatment may
improve psychosocial outcomes for
youth with obesity, including quality
of life.80 Further research in this
area is needed; however,
pediatricians and other PHCPs
should be aware that obesity
treatment interventions have not
been associated with increased
symptoms of depression.80
Evaluation for depression includes
awareness of symptoms and risk
factors. Symptoms include
irritability, fatigue, insomnia,
excessive sleeping, decline in
academic performance, family conflict,
and weight changes. Risk factors
include personal or family history of
depression, substance use, trauma,
frequent psychosomatic complaints,
psychosocial stressors, and other
mental health conditions. The AAP
CPG for depression recommends
evaluating adolescents 12 years and
older for depression annually using a
formal self-report tool, such as the
Patient Health Questionnaire-9.506
Additionally, routine monitoring of
psychosocial function and using an
evaluation tool when a patient
presents with symptoms of
depression is recommended.
If initial evaluation for depression is
positive, evaluation with a
standardized depression tool should
be conducted. Assessment for
depression should also include
direct, separate interviews with the
patient and family members to
include functional impairment at
home, school, and peer settings and
safety and/or suicide risk.506 The
implementation materials include
additional information and
resources, including tools for
pediatricians and other PHCPs, in
44
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 45]
addition to an assessment and
management algorithm.506
See Appendix 3 for more
information on the initial
management of depression.
Consensus Recommendation
The CPG authors recommend
pediatricians and other PHCPs:

Monitor for symptoms of
depression in children and
adolescents with obesity and
conduct annual evaluation for
depression for adolescents
12 years and older with a
formal self-report tool.
D5. Orthopedic Comorbidities
D.5.a. Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
(SCFE) is the most common hip
disorder in the adolescent period. It
occurs between 9 and 16 years of
age, spanning periods of rapid linear
growth. There is a 1.5:1 male-to-
female ratio, and SCFE occurs more
often in Black, Hispanic, and AI/AN
children.507,508 SCFE is bilateral in
25% to 80% of cases.507 Weakening
of the proximal femoral physis
(growth plate) causes a slip in the
physis, with a corresponding
displacement of the epiphysis
(femoral head). Risks such as
obesity exert mechanical stress on
the physis, whereas metabolic
conditions (eg, hypothyroidism,
hypopituitarism) weaken the
physis, creating the ideal setup for
a slip.
The common presentation is hip
pain, although many children may
present with knee pain alone or in
addition to hip pain. The pain can
happen only with weight bearing or
be constant. On physical
examination, there is external
rotation with passive hip flexion,
limitation of internal rotation and
antalgic gait. Pain can also be
elicited passively with internal
rotation of the hip. SCFE is
characterized as stable if the child
can bear weight with or without
crutches and as unstable when
weight-bearing is not possible.509
Because SCFE can be bilateral, the
pediatrician or other pediatric
health care provider needs to
remember to obtain a history and
exam for the contralateral leg. The
history and examination should also
exclude differential diagnoses for
hip pain (eg, infections,
inflammation or autoimmune
conditions, neoplasms, and trauma).
As the pathophysiologic process
continues, the child is at greater risk
for increased morbidity, including
avascular necrosis. Thus, the
importance of early diagnosis
cannot be overemphasized. Once
SCFE is suspected, pediatricians and
other PHCPs should confirm the
diagnosis and place an emergent
referral to the orthopedic surgeon.
The mainstay for diagnosis is plain
radiographs of the hip and pelvis
(Table 15). Ultrasonography and
computerized tomography are not
useful. In cases with equivocal
radiography results and a high index
of suspicion, MRI, which is more
sensitive at assessing the physis, can
be obtained.
See Appendix 3 for more
information on the initial
management of SCFE.
D.5.b. Blount Disease
Blount disease is a growth disorder
that primarily affects the proximal
medial tibial physis and
epiphysis.510,511 It often presents as
a triad of asymmetric tibia vara,
tibial torsion, and precurvatum. As
with SCFE, excess weight is a risk
factor, because it increases
mechanical stress on the physis.
Blount disease disproportionately
affects non-Hispanic Black or
Hispanic children.510,511 The reason
for this predilection is unclear, but it
may reflect epigenetic, social, or
cultural factors that affect early
ambulation, growth, or obesity.
Other risk factors include a family
history of Blount disease and
ambulation before 12 months of
age.510,511 Symptoms and signs
include leg pain, abnormal gait with
bowing of the lower legs, and leg-
length discrepancy.
Blount disease is classified into 2
categories: (1) infantile or early-
onset, and (2) late-onset or
adolescent Blount disease, based
whether the onset occurred before
or after age 10 years, respectively.
Infantile Blount disease is bilateral
but asymmetric, occurs more often
in males, and often includes a
preceding history of early
ambulation. For young children,
pediatricians and other PHCPs
should exclude physiologic bowing
typically seen during toddlerhood,
which is bilateral but symmetrical
and resolves by age 3 or 4 years. In
TABLE 15 Recommended Imaging for Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis and Blount Disease
Condition
First-Line Imaging
Additional Tests
SCFE
Bilateral hip (anteroposterior and lateral), frog-leg radiographs
If SCFE is unstable, cross-table lateral radiograph. MRI for
equivocal imaging results, or assess blood supply to
femoral head.
Blount
Long leg (anteroposterior and lateral), knee (anteroposterior
and lateral) radiographs
MRI of the knee to delineate level and extent of deformity,
assess blood supply to physis.a
aAdditional tests are determined by orthopedic surgeon.
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
45
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 46]
the adolescent subtype, the tibia
vara deformity is milder, unilateral,
and predominantly associated with
severe obesity.510–513
Plain radiographs are the initial
imaging of choice (Table 15). When
used, MRI provides a more sensitive
investigation of the deformity.
See Appendix 3 for more
information on the initial
management of Blount disease.
Consensus Recommendations
The CPG authors recommend
pediatricians and other PHCPs:

Perform a musculoskeletal
review of systems and physical
examination (eg, internal hip
rotation in growing child, gait) as
part of their evaluation for obesity.

Recommend immediate and
complete activity restriction,
nonweight-bearing with use of
crutches, and refer to an orthopedic
surgeon for emergent evaluation, if
SCFE is suspected. PHCPs may
consider sending the child to an
emergency department if an
orthopedic surgeon is not available.
D.5.c. Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
(IIH) (previously known as
pseudotumor cerebri) is a
neurologic condition with serious
long-term morbidity.514,515 It occurs
most often in females of child-
bearing age, and obesity is a well-
established risk factor.516–518 In a
population-based study in Olmstead
County, Minnesota, the incidence of
IIH among adult females aged 15 to
44 years with obesity was 3.5-fold
higher than that of all females in
that age group.517
The pathogenesis is unclear, hence
the name; however, 3 hypothesized
mechanisms are increased venous
pressure, decreased cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) drainage, and increased
CSF production. Other factors
associated with for IIH include
medications (eg, doxycycline,
tetracyclines, retinoic acid,
sulfonamides), autoimmune
disorders (eg, systemic lupus
erythematosus), and hormonal
disorders (eg, Cushing disease,
Addison disease). A higher
prevalence of IIH has also been
reported in females with PCOS.519
Typical symptoms are persistent
headaches, pulsatile synchronous
tinnitus, and visual changes or loss,
although the history can be variable.
Physical examination includes a
fundoscopy for papilledema and a
thorough neurologic evaluation for
cranial nerve deficits such as sixth
nerve palsy. The presence of altered
consciousness or neurologic deficit
with localized peripheral findings
should prompt pediatricians and
other PHCPs to consider another
etiology. The serious sequelae for
IIH is vision loss. Thus, a review of
system should be obtained to
evaluate any child with obesity who
has significant or progressive
headaches. There should also be a
high index of suspicion for IIH with
new-onset headaches and significant
weight gain (5% to 15% of body
weight), particularly when it occurs
in the prior 12 to 18 months.518,520
Initial evaluation for IIH involves
conducting comprehensive evaluation
by the neurologist and ophthalmologist
or at an integrated IIH clinic.
See Appendix 3 for more
information on the initial
management of IIH.
Consensus Recommendation
The CPG authors recommend
pediatricians and other PHCPs:

Maintain a high index of
suspicion for IIH with new-
onset or progressive headaches
in the context of significant
weight gain, especially for
females.
D.6. Summary
In summary, a thorough history and
physical examination is invaluable in
guiding pediatricians’ and other
PHCPs’ assessment for comorbidities.
This section of the CPG, the algorithm
in Appendix 1, Appendix 3, and the
accompanying implementation
resources provide a framework for
evaluation, reevaluation, and initial
management. Obesity is a linchpin
disorder with attendant comorbidities,
some of which are not covered in this
section or in the technical report (eg,
pes planus). For these comorbidities,
KAS 9. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should treat overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile) and obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) in children and adolescents, following the
principles of the medical home and the chronic care model, using a family-centered and nonstigmatizing approach that acknowledges obesity’s biologic, social, and structural drivers.
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
Early intervention, reduction of comorbidities, long-term health care cost savings, efﬁciency with coordinated care.
Risks, harms, costs
Time, resources, and cost to family, provider, and clinical practice. Stigma felt by patient and parent.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Beneﬁts outweigh the harms.
Intentional vagueness
Frequency of monitoring and duration of longitudinal care not solidiﬁed by scientiﬁc literature.
Role of patient preference
Family and patient’s willingness to discuss weight, attend weight-related visits, undergo obesity-related clinical and
laboratory evaluation.
Exclusions
None.
Strength
Strong.
Key references
521
46
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 47]
pediatricians and other PHCPs are
encouraged to seek resources
available through the AAP and other
professional societies.
XI. TREATMENT OF CHILD AND
ADOLESCENT OVERWEIGHT AND
OBESITY
A. Obesity is a Chronic Disease
Obesity is a chronic disease and
should be treated with intensive and
long-term care strategies, provision
of ongoing medical monitoring and
treatment of associated
comorbidities and ongoing access to
obesity treatment. As noted
previously, obesity is associated
with increased prevalence of
comorbidities, including abnormal
lipids, glucose dysregulation and
other endocrinopathies, abnormal
liver enzymes, and elevated BP. A
key component of treating obesity is
to concurrently monitor and treat
the comorbidities (see Comorbidities
section).
The chronic care model requires
care to be delivered within the
context of individual patient factors,
taking into consideration the child’s
household and familial influences,
access to healthy food and activity
spaces, and other SDoHs.522
Recommendations for obesity
treatment should be integrated
within existing community and
social systems.521 The medical home
model is the preferred standard of
care for children who have chronic
conditions,522 and the child’s
medical home should serve as a care
coordinator in the treatment of
children with obesity, coordinating
with subspecialists, including
obesity treatment specialists, and
community resources.
Treatment of obesity varies based
on individual-level factors. No
specific studies were found that
compare different treatments by a
patient’s underlying condition,
special needs, or developmental
status. Nonetheless, it is important
to recognize that the following
recommendations will require
adaptation based on the patient’s
unique medical, family,
developmental, social, and
environmental factors. No evidence
exists, however, to exclude children
with special health care needs,
complex disease, or developmental
limitations from the treatment
options outlined below, except
where specifically noted.
The evidence for pediatric obesity
treatment that is presented in this
CPG shows that several treatments
are effective in treating both obesity
and related comorbidities. It is
important to note, however, that in
all of these studies, if the treatment
is discontinued, children tend to
regain weight and lose the attendant
health benefits. There is limited
longitudinal evidence about
durability of weight change after
treatment. The natural course of
obesity across the lifespan is
characterized by responses to
treatment and relapse when
treatment ends.77 Therefore,
continuous coordinated care is
required to support ongoing obesity
treatment throughout childhood and
adolescence into young
adulthood.503
B. Evidence-based Pediatric Obesity
Treatment Reduces Risks for
Disordered Eating
In the field of pediatric nutrition, in
the treatment of both obesity and
eating disorders, concerns have
been raised as to whether diagnosis
and treatment of obesity may
inadvertently place excess attention
on eating habits, body shape, and
body size and lead to disordered
eating patterns as children grow
into adulthood. The literature
refutes this relationship, however.
Cardel et al refer to multiple studies
that have demonstrated that,
although obesity and self-guided
dieting consistently place children at
high risk for weight fluctuation and
disordered eating patterns,
participation in structured,
supervised weight management
programs decreases current and
future eating disorder symptoms
(including bulimic symptoms,
emotional eating, binge eating, and
drive for thinness) up to 6 years
after treatment.378,505,523 The
structure and underlying principles
of the primary care-based and
intensive health behavior and
lifestyle programs described here
share multiple similarities with
eating disorder programs. These
include a focus on increasing
healthful food consumption,
participating in physical activity for
enjoyment and self-care reasons,
and improving overall self-esteem
and self-concept. Structured and
professionally run pediatric obesity
treatment is associated with
reduced eating disorder prevalence,
risk, and symptoms.505,523
C. Motivational Interviewing
MI (also discussed in the Evaluation
section) is a patient-centered
counseling style that identifies and
reinforces a patient’s own
motivation for change—in contrast
to the more traditional approach in
which a provider prescribes
behavior change. MI guides families
to identify a behavior to change,
based on what the parent(s) or child
feels is important and can be
accomplished.524
MI does not impose a particular goal
but is successful when the family
changes the selected behavior—
which could be nutritional, such as
reducing sugar-sweetened
beverages; increasing physical
activity; or engaging in other
behaviors, such as eating meals
together or improving sleep hygiene.
The target of MI is the person who
is responsible for the behavior
change. Pediatricians and other
PHCPs focus on parent motivation
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
47
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 48]
when patients are preadolescent or
younger, and transition to patient
motivation, usually combined with
parent motivation, when patients
reach adolescence.
MI consists of 4 processes: engaging,
focusing, evoking, and planning.
These processes, described below,
are particularly salient when
discussing weight status and
devising a change plan.524
The MI process of engaging is
facilitated by the existing medical
pediatrician-patient relationship.
Through engaging, MI can help
answer the question of whether to
attempt behavior change. Attempts
at obesity treatment often fail
because of a disconnect between
pediatricians and other PHCPs who
see impending health problems with
regard to weight status and a
caregiver who sees a thriving,
growing child. The presence of other
challenges—such as financial
constraints and other SDOHs, mental
illness, or competing health
considerations—may make obesity
treatment a low priority.
An evaluation of these factors is
necessary before any action. The
longitudinal nature of many
pediatrician-family relationships can
enable ongoing monitoring of
weight, health status, and family
challenges. More focused obesity
treatment efforts can ensue when
families are ready. And regardless of
their readiness to engage in more
“active” obesity treatment, all
patients need follow-up,
encouragement, and monitoring of
health status.
The MI process of focusing furthers
respect for the autonomy of the
patient and family. Behavior change
is the patient’s and family’s decision,
not the pediatrician’s or other
PHCP’s. Identifying behaviors to
change is a collaborative process.
Caregivers and pediatricians (or
other pediatric health care
providers) tend to feel that the locus
of control for pediatric behavior
change resides with the caregiver
longer than it actually does,
however. Between 6 and 12 years of
age, a steady shift of control occurs
from caregiver to patient. By the
early teen years, the vast majority of
behavioral decisions reside in the
patient—not the caregiver.
Therefore, the patient should
increasingly be the target of the
readiness to change assessment and
focusing as they age.
The MI principle of evocation
advances the autonomy of the
patient and family. Pediatricians and
other PHCPs can evaluate values
that are important to the patient
and family. Speaking to an
adolescent patient who is more
concerned about athletic
performance than health,
pediatricians and other PHCPs may
have better traction discussing what
the patient hopes to accomplish
physically than attempting to incite
concern about potential future
disease. Likewise, encouraging a
very self-conscious patient to
exercise in a public setting may
come across poorly. Taking time to
evaluate individuals’ values, goals,
and barriers is a critical piece of
assessing readiness to change.
With regard to the MI process of
planning, pediatricians and other
PHCPs can evaluate a patient’s
knowledge of what is necessary for
a particular strategy and what
resources and support are available
to them. As a consultant,
pediatricians and other PHCPs play
a crucial role providing support and
guidance for the patient’s
collaboratively chosen course of
action. Because obesity treatment is
characterized by frequent setbacks
and relapses, pediatricians and
other PHCPs can also serve as
valuable experts who can assess
why behaviors may have reverted
and what strategies might be
appropriate for patients who seek to
“get back on track.”
Table 16 summarizes MI processes
as a way of evaluating and
responding to patient readiness to
change. Note that the MI tools are
suggestions; in practice, each tool
TABLE 16 Possible Use of MI to Evaluate and Respond to Readiness to Change392
MI Process
Phase of Evaluation
Goal
Possible MI Tool
Engaging
Early, getting to know patient
Establishing collaborative role,
understanding patient issues
Open-ended questions, afﬁrmations,
nonjudgmental graphics, empathic
reﬂections
Focusing
Early and when desire to change
weight status is expressed
Identifying appropriate and productive
strategies to change weight status
Readiness ruler, elicit-provide-elicit,
healthy habits survey, identifying and
responding to change talk and sustain
talk
Evoking
When behavior change is desired
Triggering internal motivation, empowering
change
Values statement, double-sided and
ampliﬁed reﬂections
Planning
When embarking on change
Carrying out effective change plan, dealing
with relapse
Readiness ruler, action reﬂections,
summarization, teach back, SMART
goals (speciﬁc, measurable,
achievable, realistic, and timely)
48
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 49]
may find utility in every phase of
evaluation.
C.1. Motivational Interviewing and Weight
Status
Prospective studies specifically
examining MI have demonstrated
that the approach has positive effect
on weight status, compared with
controls.525–528 The outcomes
included greater decline in BMI
percentile or BMI SD score (also
known as z-score), and less of an
increase in BMI. These studies were
all low-intensity treatments (ie, less
than 5 hours) that were delivered in
pediatric primary care practices by
medical providers and dietitians who
successfully learned and used MI.
MI is a tool used with many
different strategies aimed at
encouraging nutrition and physical
activity change, and so the use of MI
does not guarantee effect. Tables 2
and 3 in the technical report on
interventions (https://doi.org/
10.1542/peds.2022-060642)
provide an overview of all the
programs, including impact and use
of MI. Of the 2 additional effective
low-intensity studies (not aimed at
MI evaluation), 1 included MI in
both arms529 and 1 did not use
MI.530
Approximately 23 low-intensity
studies were ineffective, of which 14
included MI.531–551 These programs
varied in participant age, sample size,
duration, and other components.
Among moderate-intensity
interventions (5–25 hours), about
one-third of the approximately 20
effective interventions used
MI.552–574
Conversely, approximately one-
quarter of the ineffective programs
used MI.123,125,150,151,567,575–611
Use of MI in high-intensity programs
is more difficult to interpret,
because many of these studies
resulted in several publications at
different outcomes points, with
discrepant effects. Some used MI in
both study arms.439,610,612–614 An
estimated one-quarter of the
effective high-intensity programs
used MI, however.439,612,613,615–622
Although much more work is
needed to examine the optimal
characteristics that might moderate
MI’s impact, like training, fidelity to
the MI process, potential patient
characteristics, as well as target
behaviors, the success of the studies
in which MI was the core treatment
supports this KAS.
D. Intensive Health Behavior and
Lifestyle Treatment
IHBLT is the foundational approach
to achieve body mass reduction or
the attenuation of excessive weight
gain in children. It involves visits of
sufficient frequency and intensity to
facilitate sustained healthier eating
and physical activity habits.79 IHBLT
typically involves engagement with,
and participation of, families in
discussions of necessary treatment
based on the severity of disease.
It also involves interaction with
pediatricians and other PHCPs
who are trained in lifestyle-related
fields and requires significantly
more time and resources than
are typically allocated to routine
well-child care.623
TABLE 17 Treatment Intensity and BMI Reduction in Randomized Controlled Trials
Authors
Study Population
BMI Outcomes
Duration
Wilﬂey (2017)615
US; ages 7–11; OW/OB; n 5 172
Not reported; “6.71 percent overweight” at 8 mo
26–51 h per 8 mo
Butte (2017)642
US; ages 2–12; OW/OB; n 5 549
0.42 at 12 mo; only effective in ages 6–8
>52 h per 12 mo
Nemet (2005)621
Israel; ages 6–16; OB; n 5 46
2.2 at 12 mo
26–51 h per 3 mo
Savoye (2007)439
US; ages 8–16; OB, n 5 174
3.3 at 12 mo, 2.8 at 24 mo
>52 h per 12 mo
Vos (2011)617
Germany; ages 7–15; OB; n 5 73
0.2 (BMIz) at 12 mo
26–51 h per 3 mo
Weigel (2008)612
Germany; ages 7–15; OB; n 5 73
4.3 at 12 mo
>52 h per 12 mo
Reinehr (2010)643
Germany; ages 7–15; OW/OB; n 5 66
1.5 at 6 mo
>52 h per 6 mo
OW, overweight; OB, obese.
KAS 10. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should use motivational interviewing (MI) to engage patients and families in treating overweight (BMI $ 85th percentile to <95th percentile) and
obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile).
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
Improvement in BMI, including in low-intensity interventions.
Risks, harms, costs
Minimal. Use of MI can add some time to the standard visit.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Beneﬁt outweighs risk.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient preference
Patient preference is central.
Exclusions
Patients who are not responsible for their behavior change, such as children who are young or with developmental
or cognitive impairment. In these situations, MI should target the parent or other caregiver.
Strength
Moderate.
Key references
525
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
49
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 50]
There are known limitations for
families to access and participate in
IHBLT. These limitations include the
relative scarcity and distribution of
such treatment programs and
pediatricians or other pediatric
health care providers with
experience and/or training in
pediatric obesity treatment, family
transportation challenges, loss of
school or work time to attend
multiple recurring appointments
during what are typically working
hours, SDoHs, competing health
issues for children or family
members, and mismatched
expectations between the family
(who may expect significant weight
loss) and pediatricians or other
pediatric health care providers.624
IHBLT is appropriate for typically
developing children and adolescents
as well as CYSHCN, although will
require modification based on the
patient’s unique health conditions
and developmental factors.
The most consistently effective
IHBLT programs deliver 26 or more
hours of face-to-face, family-based
counseling on nutrition and physical
activity over at least a 3- to 12-
month period, for children aged for
children 6 years and older with
overweight and obesity, with more
limited evidence for children 2 to 5
years of age.625 Although not
universally available, treatment
programs that provide engaging,
group-based physical activity and
nutrition programming are currently
available in various forms across the
United States.222,626 Some IHBLT are
housed in academic medical centers
or community hospitals, some are in
primary care offices or obesity
treatment specialty clinics (ie,
weight management clinics), and
others are delivered through
partnerships with local community
entities such as the YMCA627 or
parks and recreation
departments.628 Clinic-community
partnerships in particular have
demonstrated implementation
feasibility and are engaging to low-
income and racially diverse
populations.629 Pediatricians and
other PHCPs should investigate local
programs in the area and become
familiar with the referral
requirements and processes to
connect patients with this treatment
option (Fig 3).
Each of the components of the KAS
below are supported by evidence
that is detailed in the technical
report on interventions and
summarized here:

26 or more hours: The major
factor driving the effectiveness of
IHBLT is the intensity (or dose)
of the intervention, measured in
hours of face-to-face patient
contact. The number of hours, or
“dose,” delivered is directly
proportional to the likelihood a
child will experience a reduction
in BMI (Table 17). Although a
threshold effect was observed at
26 or more hours over a 3- to
12-month period, interventions
that delivered $52 hours of con-
tact over the same duration dem-
onstrated the most consistent and
significant reduction in BMI and
cardiometabolic comorbidity
improvement.625 As described in
the technical report, 28% of
treatments <5 hours,525–527,529,
531–535,537–540,546–549,630 38% of
treatments 5 to 25 hours,527,537,554,
555,557,559,560,563,567,568,570,572,573,
575–583,602 and 75% of treatments
$26 hours290,554,555,557,559,
560,563,567,568,570,572,573,575–583,602,
604–606,612,617,618,621,631 led to
significant improvements in BMI
among pediatric participants.80
Hence, pediatricians and other
PHCPs should look for programs
that engage families often and
frequently. No studies directly
compare the same intervention
WHO:
Patient and 
family in 
partnership 
with a 
multidisciplinary 
treatment team* 
WHEN:
Promptly for 
child or 
adolescent with 
overweight or 
obesity  
Intensive Health Behavior and Lifestyle Treatment (IHBLT)
WHAT:
Health education 
and skill building 
on multiple topics
 
     
       Behavior 
    modification 
 and counseling 
  WHERE:
Healthcare setting
Community-based
setting with linkage 
to medical home
CHANNEL:
 
    
Face-to-face 
  (strongest 
   evidence)
 
     
     Virtual 
   (growing
   evidence)
 FORMAT:
        Group, 
  Individual, or
         Both
DOSAGE:
Longitudinal 
treatment 
across 3-12 
months with 
ideally > 26 
contact hours
+
* PCPs and/or PHCPs with training in obesity as well as other professionals trained in behavior and lifestyle fields such as dietitians, exercise specialists and behavioral health 
practitioners
FIGURE 3
Intensive health behavior and lifestyle treatment.
50
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 51]
over a shorter versus longer
period of time, however.

Face-to-face: Most of the studies
included interventions where
IHBLT occurred in group settings
where families gathered together
in a health care or community
location, or in a family’s home as
part of a home visit. Sessions were
led by a variety of individuals or
combinations of individuals,
including community health
workers, nutritionists, exercise
physiologists, physical therapists,
and social workers. Fewer studies
evaluated the effectiveness of treat-
ment that did not take place in a
face-to-face setting, including
mobile health tools for parents or
adolescents,530,632 telemedicine-
delivered counseling sessions,557 or
guided self-help for families.578
Although there is promising
evidence that these strategies may
be successful, more research is
needed to understand the target
population, effectiveness on health
outcomes, and implementation
potential.

Family-based: In all effective
studies, the parent or the family
unit was included in the treat-
ment. Prior evidence has demon-
strated that parent involvement
is associated with early success
in child obesity treatment632 and
that family-based interventions
are more effective in achieving
and sustaining child BMI reduc-
tion than interventions that tar-
get the child without including
the family (ie, school-based,
summer camp, after school).633
For adolescent populations, the
evidence and best practices for
including parents in obesity
treatment is less clear.634 Several
studies measure parental BMI as
a treatment outcome, along with
adolescent BMI, although none
included in the technical report
have demonstrated significant
reduction in parent BMI.549,566,
568,569,578,563,606,628 Obesity tends
to affect families; thus, family-
based treatment has the potential
to improve the health and weight
status of other household mem-
bers, including siblings, although
no data are available to support
this outcome.

Multicomponent: Nearly all of the
evidence for effective treatment
FIGURE 4
Facilitators for successful health behavior lifestyle treatment (this figure highlights some of the factors that are associated with successful health behavior
and lifestyle treatment).
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
51
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 52]
of childhood obesity includes
components that focus on
healthy eating and physical activ-
ity. The specific nutritional and
exercise content varies widely
among studies, and is delivered
in different combinations, so no
one unified approach has demon-
strated superiority over another.
The physical activity component is
more effective when children are
engaged in a combination of aerobic
and nonaerobic physical activity,635
compared with physical activity
counseling. Noncompetitive,
cooperative, fun activities that build
motor skills as well as self-confidence
are more engaging for children.
Several studies have noted adaptations
for children with obesity, including a
preference for water-based activities
and nonweight-bearing activities
(ie, cycling) and considerations for
physical therapy or conditioning or
training if a child has a low level of
fitness.
Nutrition skill-building sessions that
involve direct meal preparation or
tasting are more effective in
increasing children’s acceptance of
new foods and increasing parent
confidence to prepare meals at
home, compared with nutrition
education.636 Specific nutritional
content included in treatment varies
as well. Several studies relied on
published guidelines (ie, NHLBI-
supported CHILD-1diet), whereas
others used specific dietary
approaches, such as the reduced-
glycemic load diet553,564,574 or using
meal replacements.591
Several of the more-intensive
programs that demonstrate
effectiveness also included a focus
on mental health and parenting
skills; thus, evidence exists to
support the addition of these
components to increase
effectiveness.613,618,619,622,637–639
Programs often address other
components of health as well,
including getting enough sleep,
reducing sedentary screen time, and
addressing stigma and weight bias.
Although these additional elements
are generally recognized as positive
and are consistent with anticipatory
guidance, they do not have evidence
for additional benefit in the context
of IHBLT.

Over a 3- to 12-month period: The
criteria for the evidence review
required a weight-specific out-
come at least 3 months after the
intervention started. The ratio-
nale for excluding shorter-term
lifestyle treatments was to en-
sure that pediatricians and other
PHCPs focus on treatments that
have a more-sustained treatment
effect and that reinforce with pa-
rents that obesity does not have
a “quick fix,” but requires long-
term and ongoing attention.
Treatments with duration longer
than 12 months are likely to
have additional and sustained
treatment benefit. There is lim-
ited evidence, however, to evalu-
ate the durability of effectiveness
and the ability of long-term treat-
ments to retain family
engagement.

For children 2 to 18 years of age
with overweight and obesity: The
USPSTF identified evidence for
intensive “lifestyle” treatments
starting at age 6 years.79 This
KAS includes children down to
age 2, recognizing that several
recent studies show treatment
effectiveness in preschoolers 2 to
5 years of age.565,566,569,570,618,
631,638,640 Treatment studies de-
livered care differently depend-
ing on the child’s age. For
example, studies targeting pre-
schoolers more often involved
home visits and focused on
parental skills training. Studies
targeting adolescents more often
focused on the teen’s autonomy,
preferences, and self-image.
Intensive behavioral interventions
should be tailored to the child’s
developmental abilities and
learning skills.
D.1. Evidence for Effectiveness
The 2017 USPSTF recommendation
for pediatric obesity treatment is
based on high-quality randomized
and nonrandomized studies that
demonstrate a significant BMI
reduction and were published
through January 2016 (n 5 42).79,625
The evidence review to inform this
CPG additionally included a
systematic evidence review of
randomized and nonrandomized
interventions leading to BMI
reduction (March 2020; 214 total
intervention studies of all types; of
these, 126 were randomized lifestyle
studies).
The evidence review is additive to
the USPSTF review, as it includes
new studies since January 2016 as
well as studies with a comparative
effectiveness design. Dose is clearly
the factor most strongly correlated
with treatment outcomes, as
evidenced by a selection of trials
that deliver “high intensity” and
“comprehensive” contact over a
2- to 12-month625 or 3- to 12-month
time period.80
In research settings simulating
clinical practice, intensive behavioral
intervention has evidence for
effectiveness in lowering child BMI,
reducing comorbidities, and
improving quality of life.
Interventions that provide more
$26 hours of treatment are
associated with a reduction in BMI
z-score between 0.10 and
0.50530,565,569,570,612,618,622,641 or a
range of 1.6 to 8.1 kg (3.5 to
18 lb) weight loss over 1 year.
Interventions that meet the intensity
or “dose” threshold of 26 hours or
more over 3 to 12 months can lead
to clinically significant
52
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 53]
improvements in BMI, systolic and
diastolic BP, insulin, and glucose
levels and to clinically meaningful
improvements in comorbidities such
as asthma, obstructive sleep apnea,
and NAFLD.440–444 Interventions
lasting less than 3 months did not
demonstrate effectiveness.

High-intensity: Greater contact
hours lead to greater treatment
effect. In all of the studies, inter-
vention dose is most strongly as-
sociated with weight outcomes.
Although weight management
interventions above a threshold
of 26 contact hours are generally
effective in reducing excess
weight (mean BMI z-score reduc-
tion 0.2), higher-dose interven-
tions with contact time $52
hours demonstrate a stronger
and more consistent BMI reduc-
tion effect.625 The mean differ-
ence in change of BMI z-score
between controls and interven-
tions with $52 hours of contact
is 0.31 (95% CI, 0.16 to
0.46), and absolute BMI z-score
reductions in the pooled inter-
vention groups is 0.05 to 0.34.625
This treatment effect is observed
in children 2 to 16 years of age
but most consistently in children
6 to 12 years of age.642 Savoye
showed effective treatment in
those 8 to 16 years of age but
less effectiveness among those
13 to 16 years of age,439 and BMI
reduction is driven by the youn-
ger age groups in the Weigel612
and Reinehr643 studies. A high
dropout rate in obesity treatment
is a known threat to delivering
actual treatment hours. In re-
search settings, attrition rates of
40% are common439; in real-
world settings working with low-
income families, attrition rates
can be as high as 60%.644

Comprehensive: Interventions
that include behavior, physical
activity, and nutrition compo-
nents are associated with child
BMI reduction. In randomized
studies, effective behavior change
uses a family-focused approach.615
Parents are taught self-manage-
ment for their own behaviors (eg,
role modeling), as well as positive
parenting strategies and contin-
gency management. Children learn
goal-setting, body acceptance, and
strategies to manage bullying. Ef-
fective interventions, for example,
deliver moderate-to-vigorous phys-
ical activity for at least 50 minutes
twice a week for 6 months and
40 minutes of nutrition counseling
weekly for 6 months.439,645 Nutri-
tion content includes a nondiet,
lifestyle modification approach
that teaches families to set goals
for meal preparation, grocery
shopping, and learning skills in-
cluding portion size and label
reading.439,612,643
There is no evidence that obesity
treatments harm patients’ quality of
life. Among the studies that included
quality of life measures, none
showed worsening; about one-third
showed improvement to quality of
life.535,555,615,642 More study on
treatments’ impact on mental health
is needed, however. Few studies
examined mental health impact;
although none showed worsening
mental health, all of the studies
excluded subjects who had
established mental health disorders
at baseline.553,579,646
The prevalence of eating disorders is
not well-characterized in patients
participating in obesity treatment,647
but disordered eating patterns may
be more common among youth with
obesity compared with youth at a
healthy weight.387 Therefore,
pediatricians and other PHCPs
should evaluate patients before,
during, and after intensive behavioral
intervention for the presence of
disordered eating (as discussed in
the evaluation section) as well as for
greater-than-expected weight change.
D.2. Referral Strategies
Limiting factors to IHBLT
effectiveness include lack of
engagement or participation by
families and high attrition rates.
Thus, when referring to more
intensive treatment, pediatricians
and other PHCPs should inform
patients and their family members
about the reason for the referral,
encourage families to actively
participate in the treatment, and
schedule follow-up visits to monitor
progress in the treatment.
One factor in early attrition may be
mismatched expectations for weight
loss.648 Families can best make
decisions about IHBLT participation
after providers inform them of
commitment and likely outcomes.
Pediatricians and other PHCPs are
encouraged to help to set
reasonable expectations for these
outcomes among families, as there is
a significant heterogeneity to
treatment response and there is
currently no evidence to predict
how individual children will
respond. Many children will not
experience BMI improvement,
particularly if their participation
falls below the treatment threshold.
As described in the Health Behavior
and Lifestyle Treatment section,
those who do experience BMI
improvement will likely note a
modest improvement of 1% to 3%
BMI percentile decline.396
D.3. Prompt IHBLT
A key distinction from prior
recommendations is for
pediatricians and other PHCPs to
refer as soon as possible to IHBLT.
Current practice patterns involve
counseling in primary care practices,
often for months to years, before
referring to more intensive
programs. Although providing
patient-centered and
nonstigmatizing nutrition and
activity counseling is important for
children of all weight classifications,
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
53
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 54]
there is no evidence to support
either watchful waiting or
unnecessary delay of appropriate
treatment of children who have
already developed obesity. Many
children are only referred to
treatment programs when their
obesity has become more
severe.529,626 A delay in care
ultimately reduces the likelihood of
treatment success for the child.649
Similarly, no evidence supports
selectively referring patients to
obesity treatment programs based on
those who meet certain criteria, such
as obesity severity, presence of
comorbidities, and/or readiness or
motivation to change. Although there
is currently limited evidence for
obesity treatment in children 2
through 5 years of age, excess weight
gain in early life predicts future
obesity650; therefore, future studies
should examine treatment in this age
group. Pediatricians and other PHCPs
are advised to prioritize the most
effective treatment available for
patients with obesity and encourage
patients and families to use these
programs at the time of obesity
diagnosis.555,615,642
It is necessary to provide IHBLT
within various sites of health care
delivery. Face-to-face time with
pediatricians and other PHCPs cannot
realistically achieve the intensity that
is most effective. Thus, RDNs, health
behavior specialists, and exercise
professionals should be part of the
health care team and have critical
skills for IHBLT. They can work
within a multidisciplinary obesity
treatment clinic, be embedded within
a medical home organization so that
they coordinate with pediatricians
and other PHCPs, and participate in
care through referrals. Given the
number of children who meet criteria
for treatment, and the current
limitations on number of pediatricians
and other PHCPs who deliver IHBLT,
a significant effort toward medical
home capacity-building will be
needed to achieve equitable access for
all children. Current programs are
generally located in cities, and often
in academic centers.651 An individual
center may or may not offer the
entire range of intensive treatment,
including intensive lifestyle,
pharmacotherapy, and surgery.
Providers should be familiar with the
treatment programs at local centers;
their knowledge of the child and
family, along with awareness of
available options, can guide treatment
direction. Rural communities need
resources and programs, especially
ones that accommodate the distinct
challenges of rural living, including
transportation and economic and
cultural factors.652
On the strength of the literature, the
USPSTF gives the evidence for
intensive “lifestyle” treatment of
childhood obesity a “B” rating,
which means that health plans
should cover this care.79,625 The
USPSTF is authorized by Congress to
assign grades to the state of the
evidence regarding treatment
options for diseases. Under the
Affordable Care Act, grades of “A” or
“B” are mandated to be covered
with no deductibles, copayments, or
cost-sharing.653 A large gap
currently exists, however, between
this expectation and the actual
policies in state Medicaid and
commercial health plans. Health care
systems should build the capacity
necessary to deliver this evidence-
based level of care (see the
Implementation Barriers section for
more discussion).
E. When Intensive Programs Are Not
Available
Pediatricians and other PHCPs are
on the frontline of identifying
overweight and obesity. Consistent
success in behavior-based obesity
treatment is highly related to
treatment intensity. Both individual
and systemic barriers may, however,
keep many families from receiving
the recommended moderate- to
high-intensity multicomponent
obesity treatment. In addition,
pediatricians and other PHCPs
KAS 11. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should provide or refer children 6 y and older (Grade B) and may provide or refer children 2 through 5 y of age (Grade C) with overweight (BMI $
85th percentile to <95th percentile) and obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) to intensive health behavior and lifestyle treatment. Health behavior and lifestyle treatment is more effective with
greater contact hours; the most effective treatment includes 26 or more hours of face-to-face, family-based, multicomponent treatment over a 3- to 12-mo period.
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade B: Children $6 y of Age. Grade C: Children 2 Through 5 y of Age.
Beneﬁts
BMI reduction, quality of life improvement, comorbidity improvement or resolution is associated with 26 or more
hours of face-to-face, family-based, multicomponent treatment over 3 to 12 mo.
Risks, harms, costs
Minimal risk or harm. Participation is time-intensive and requires repeated visits. Treatment is costly to administer
and inconsistently paid.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Beneﬁt outweighs risk.
Intentional vagueness
Impact is inconsistent in studies with signiﬁcant heterogeneity of treatment response. Increasing dose of treatment is
associated with more BMI improvement.
Role of patient preference
Patient preference is central.
Exclusions
Patients not responsible for their behavior change, such as children who are young or with developmental or
cognitive impairment.
Strength
Moderate.
Key references
625
54
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 55]
should be aware that pediatric
patients who seek bariatric surgical
treatment may encounter significant
disparities in access to care based
on demographics, SES, and
insurance type.654
Availability of IHBLT or other
treatments is generally poor, as
described in a Children’s Hospital
Association report in 2013.655
Differences in access based on
demographics and similar factors
have not been well studied. A
consortium of academic centers
with pediatric weight management
programs reported a high proportion
of publicly insured patients and
racial and ethnic diversity626;
however, these sites are safety-net
medical centers in larger cities and,
as such, are a small sample of the
children in the United States with
obesity. Pediatricians and other
PHCPs are encouraged to pay
attention to difference in care access
and seek mechanisms to mitigate
these challenges.654
Although the health care and
payment systems often limit the
time and resources available within
the primary care office, families can
benefit from guidance outside of
intensive programs, including pre
and postprogram participation.
Several successful studies have been
conducted in the primary care
setting, with less than 5 hours of
treatment and using individual visits
rather than group visits. These
treatments varied in their approach
and included clinical decision
support built into electronic health
records (EHRs), MI, and a self-
guided curriculum for teens and
parents.525,529,591 Strategies that
may help pediatricians and other
PHCPs include use of EHRs to
remind and streamline care during
office visits, MI training to
effectively encourage families to
take action, and resources for
families to use outside of office
visits.
When an IHBLT is not available,
pediatricians and other PHCPs can
increase the intensity of weight
management support through
collaboration and by connecting
families with community resources
to support nutrition and address
food insecurity (eg, food provision
programs), physical activity (eg,
local parks, recreation programs),
and other SDoHs. Pediatricians and
other PHCPs should familiarize
themselves with resources and
actively collaborate with other
specialists and community
programs.
For example, pediatricians and other
PHCPs should assess the availability
and pediatric expertise of local
dietitians and offer referrals to
patients where possible. RDNs can
assess a child’s nutritional needs,
including appropriate food groups
and portion sizes, and provide
guidance for specific diet needs and
preferences, including cultural
patterns. Some RDNs have received
special certification in pediatric and
adolescent obesity, and the Academy
of Nutrition and Dietetics offers
RDNs additional learning
opportunities in pediatric and
adolescent obesity and encourages
training in patient-centered
counseling techniques. RDNs can
complement the care of medical
providers and may be the most
widely available specialist with
whom pediatricians and other
PHCPs can work to provide more
intensive behavioral intervention.
Behavioral health specialists, ideally
integrated into primary care, can
focus on the process of behavior
change, including parenting skills,
role modeling, and consistent
reinforcement techniques.
Implementation tools can help
address actions in low-resourced
settings. Exercise specialists can
provide counseling and training to
engage children and families in
noncompetitive, cooperative, fun,
aerobic and nonaerobic activities.
Behavior goals related to physical
activity include aiming for the
physical activity guidelines of
60 minutes perday of moderate to
vigorous physical activity635,642 and
reducing time spent in sedentary
behavior.656 Physical activity
limitations, such as joint pain related
to musculoskeletal comorbidities or
increased work of breathing related
to severe obesity, should be
considered, and a stepped care plan
for a gradual increase in physical
activity can be made. Medicaid and
other insurance plans may restrict
coverage to specific medical
conditions which do not include
obesity or risk factor reduction.
Providers can search for community
programs that follow a philosophy of
noncompetitive, fun activities, ideally
engaging the whole family. See Figure
4 for facilitators of successful health
behavior lifestyle treatment.
Consensus Recommendations
The CPG authors recommend that
pediatricians and other PHCPs:

Deliver the best available inten-
sive treatment to all children
with overweight and obesity.

Build collaborations with other
specialists and programs in their
communities.
F. Specific Health Behavior
Recommendations
Many pediatricians and other
PHCPs, especially those in primary
care, have an important role in
recommending specific health
behaviors to improve energy
balance. The following specific
health behavior recommendations
do not form a KAS, because
randomized controlled trial (RCTs)
that test each in isolation do not
exist and are unlikely to be
performed.
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
55
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 56]
Effective programs described in the
technical report incorporated many
nutrition, physical activity, and
behavior change strategies
simultaneously, an approach that is
responsive to the multiple behaviors
that contribute to energy imbalance.
Single-component interventions,
such as physical activity alone, were
generally not successful, and the
multicomponent studies were not
designed to isolate the impact of one
component over another. If the
study target were too narrow (for
example, consumption of 5 fruits
and vegetables a day), any impact
on weight or BMI would likely be
too small to detect.
Most of the successful interventions
described in the technical report
described nutrition counseling
without a structured diet.
(Exceptions were a small study that
found both low and modified
carbohydrate diets were better than
control,572 and a study that found a
focus on only beverages and a focus
on multiple nutrition changes were
both superior to control but not
different from each other.571) Two
effective studies of adolescents
implemented caloric restriction of
1300 to 1550 calories per day, but
the interventions also included
additional components, such as
physical activity promotion and
behavior change strategies.563,591
Two small studies found benefit
from interventions that reduced
glycemic load.564,574
Despite the lack of evidence for
specific strategies on weight
outcomes, many of these strategies
have clear health benefits and were
components in RCTs of intensive
behavioral intervention. Many
strategies are endorsed by major
professional or public health
organizations. Therefore,
pediatricians and other PHCPs can
appropriately encourage families to
adopt these strategies.
Pediatricians and other PHCPs
should present these specific
strategies in the context of MI,
helping families to identify their
own goals and to determine steps to
overcome barriers in making
change. The AAP’s Next Steps: A
Practitioner’s Guide of Themed
Follow-up Visits to Help Patients
Achieve a Healthy Weight provides
step-by-step strategies for the
pediatrician or other PHCP on
content and delivery of each theme,
including portion sizes, screen time
and sleep, meal patterns and snacks,
and bullying and teasing.657,658
Table 18 lists specific behavior
strategies endorsed by major
professional and public health
organizations. Some systematic
reviews are cited, which include
many association studies, but a
comprehensive search for studies
and reviews was not performed.
Table 19 presents strategies that are
common but have not at this time
been addressed by the AAP or other
major health organizations. For
some, rigorous systematic reviews
provide information about potential
benefit as well as harm or lack of
harm. Brief mention of existing
literature is included, but extensive
searches for publications were not
performed.
When actively intervening to treat
overweight and obesity in the
primary care setting, pediatricians
and other PHCPs should also
evaluate and address the modifiable
risk factors for obesity that are
described in the Risk Factors
section. These include parenting
feeding styles, frequency of dining
out and eating fast food, and ACEs,
among other household risk factors.
Awareness of supports and barriers
in the patient’s community will also
help guide the family to resources
outside the home, such as parks and
recreation programs, community
gardens, and school wellness
policies.
Parents and caregivers have a
crucial role to play in obesity
treatment through strategies such as
parental monitoring, limit setting,
reducing barriers, managing family
conflict, and modifying the home
environment.15,684,685 A systematic
review of parental involvement in
childhood obesity treatment studies
found that medium- to high-intensity
parental involvement was associated
with weight-related measures of
treatment effectiveness.686 Parents
can serve as role models and provide
support in obesity treatment. In
addition, an enhanced parent-child
relationship functions as a mediator
in development of healthier
behaviors and further weight
control.687 Parents themselves and
family relationships may also benefit
from children’s obesity treatment.
A recent systematic review found
that certain common features
involving parents in obesity
treatment interventions with their
preadolescent children were
successful in producing nutrition
and physical activity behavior
change. These features include
promotion of intrinsic motivation
and self-efficacy through
empowerment of parents and
children and fostering shared value
and whole-family ownership. The
activities most commonly associated
with positive behavior change
included parental leadership in goal
setting, problem solving, social
support, demonstrating desired
behaviors, and restructuring the
home environment. It is encouraging
that the majority of studies that
included low-income populations in
this review found favorable
results.688
Adolescence can present substantial
challenges to family-based care,
because this period is marked by a
developmentally normative period of
56
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 57]
increased desire for independence
and autonomy, despite continued
reliance on parents for many needs.
Given these challenges, the research
investigating specific clinical
paradigms for parent involvement in
adolescent obesity treatment
demonstrates mixed findings regarding
the ideal level of involvement and the
specific parenting strategies that can
optimize treatment. Further research
and detailed reporting are needed to
inform clinical guidelines for optimizing
the role of parents in adolescent
obesity treatment.634
TABLE 18 Behavior Strategies
Strategy
Description
References
Reduction of sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs)
Higher intake of sugar-sweetened beverages
(carbonated beverages, sweetened beverages,
soda, sports drinks, and fruit drinks) is
associated with greater wt gain in adults and
children. The American Heart Association
(AHA) recommends not more than 25 g (6 tsp)
each day of added sugar and not more than 1,
8-oz serving of SSB per week. The AAP
discourages the consumption of sports drinks
and energy drinks for children and
adolescents. The AAP statement on fruit juice
notes that it is a poor substitute for whole
fruit because of its high sugar and calorie
content and pediatricians should advocate for
elimination of fruit juice in children with
excessive wt gain.
Systematic review659; AHA SSB660; AAP sports
and energy drinks661; AAP fruit juice662
Choose My Plate
MyPlate is the US Department of Agriculture’s
(USDA) broad set of recommendations for
healthy eating for Americans. These
recommendations include multiple healthy diet
goals: low in added sugar, low in concentrated
fat, nutrient dense but not calorie dense,
within an appropriate calorie range without
deﬁned calorie restriction, and with balanced
protein and carbohydrate. The principles can
be adapted to different food cultures. There is
a surprising dearth of literature on the
impact of these guidelines on health and BMI
outcomes and on the most effective education
practices.
USDA choosemyplate.gov
60 min daily of moderate to vigorous physical
activity
Aerobic exercise, especially for 60 min at a time,
is associated with improved body weight in
youth although its effect may be small and
variable. It is also associated with better
glucose metabolism proﬁles. High-intensity
interval training in youth with obesity may
improve body fat, weight, and cardiometabolic
risk factors, although the effect is variable.663
The Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans
recommends 60 min per day for children and
adolescents.
Systematic reviews664–667; AAP physical activity;
Guidelines for Americans379,635
Reduction in sedentary behavior
Reduction in sedentary behavior, generally
deﬁned as reduced screen time, has
consistently shown improvement in BMI
measures, although impact is small. Early
studies focused on reduced television, a
discrete activity that is simpler than current
multifunctional electronic devices. The AAP
recommends no media use under age 18 mo,
a 1-h limit for ages 2–5 y, and a parent-
monitored plan for media use in older
children, with a goal of appropriate, not-
excessive use but without a deﬁned upper
limit.
AAP media and young minds170; systematic
review656
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
57
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 58]
G. Self-Management
Obesity is a complex chronic disease
with biologic, environmental, and
other causative factors that are
systemic and operate at the local,
regional, and global level. As with all
chronic disease, the patient and
family have to manage the demands
of the disease and evidence-based
treatment in the context of these
factors. This means that individual
patients and their families will have
unique challenges to overcome
based on the severity of their
disease and the adversity of their
environments. Effective obesity
treatment helps patients and
families develop self-management
TABLE 19 Common Strategies
Strategy
Description
References
Avoidance of breakfast skipping
Breakfast skipping among children is associated
with overweight and obesity and with lower
quality of dietary intake throughout the day.
Systematic review668
Trafﬁc Light Diet
This approach to teaching healthy eating has
shown consistent success within the context
of moderate- to high-intensive multicomponent
programs, in which experienced providers
help families learn and use the diet.
Evidence summary can be found on the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Web site:
https://www.andeal.org/topic.cfm?cat=1429&
evidence_summary_id=250033&highlight=
trafﬁce%20light%20diet&home=1.
5 2 1 0
This messaging emerged from a consortium of
primary care pediatricians as simple,
memorable, and feasible (www.mainehealth.
org/Lets-Go/Childrens-Program). Each
component of 5-2-1-0 messaging aligns with a
major recommendation or guideline: 5 fruits
and vegetables a day is consistent with the
USDA ChooseMyPlate recommendations, 2 h or
less of screen time is consistent with earlier
versions of AAP policy; 1 h or more of
moderate to vigorous physical activity is
consistent with Physical Activity
Recommendations for Americans, and 0 (or
nearly no) sugar-sweetened beverages aligns
with USDA, AHA, and AAP.
Scant literature on weight or BMI impact.669,670
Attainment of 5-2-1-0 behaviors is low.671
Use of screen-based physical activity (exergames)
Video games that require physical activity can
reduce children’s body wt. Players can reach
levels of light-to-moderate intensity physical
activity during exergame play, especially
games that involve whole-body movement.
Systematic reviews have shown that children
can lose body weight or attenuate weight gain
when playing exergames over a sustained
period of time. Speciﬁc setting in which
exergaming resulted in weight, adiposity, or
BMI z-score improvement included home, part
of a structured physical activity program, and
part of a multicomponent obesity treatment.
Children experienced modest reductions in
weight, adiposity, or BMI z-score when
exergames were provided in the home, within
a structured physical activity program, and
within an obesity treatment program. There is
less evidence to date for newer technologies
like smartphone apps and wearables, but
these are promising tools to engage and
sustain youths’ interest in healthy behaviors.
645,672–683
Appropriate amount of sleep for age
Obesity is associated with shorter sleep duration,
and the association appears to be driven by
increased calorie consumption, decreased
physical activity from fatigue, and potential
hormonal and metabolic alterations such as
increased ghrelin and decreased leptin
leading to hunger.
Systematic review243–247
58
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 59]
strategies that are critical for
chronic disease management in this
context.
Self-management has been defined
as “the development of a range of
attitudes, health behaviours and
skills to help minimize the impact of
their condition on all aspects of life
for themselves and their families
and caregivers.”689 Self-management
has also been described “as a
dynamic, interactive, and daily
process in which individuals engage
to manage a chronic illness,”690 and
“the ability of the individual, in
conjunction with family, community,
and health care professionals, to
manage symptoms; treatments;
lifestyle changes; and psychosocial,
cultural, and spiritual consequences
of health conditions.”691 For
example, dietary change is an
important treatment strategy in the
self-management of many chronic
diseases692,693 and is about
“tailoring support to improve
knowledge, skills and confidence”694
by promoting facilitators such as
“location, language, incentive and
tailored resources”695 while
mitigating barriers, such as
inadequate knowledge or skills or
lack of time.696 For young children
and children with disabilities, “self-
management” may apply to
caregivers on behalf of or in
conjunction with the patient.
The complex environment in which
children and adolescents with
obesity and their families live needs
to be acknowledged in the way
providers individualize and tailor
self-management supports.
H. Treatment Considerations for
Children and Youth With Special
Health Care Needs
CYSHCN are those who have, or who
are at increased risk for, a chronic
physical, developmental, behavioral,
or emotional condition and who also
require health and related services
of a type or amount beyond that
required by children generally.74
It is important that management of
obesity for CYSHCN includes similar
protocols and processes as those for
children with typical development.
This includes assessing health
behaviors, identifying community
resources and policies, sharing
appropriate resources, and promoting
healthy behaviors.697,698 Pediatricians
and other PHCPs are encouraged to
assess risks contributing to obesity in
collaboration with families and
interdisciplinary teams (specialists,
psychologists, primary care providers,
mental health professionals, social
workers, physical therapists, and
dietitians), providing their patients
(CYSHCN) and their families with
essential skills and resources to
manage obesity.
In addition, it is critical to recognize
that CYSHCN may have physical,
emotional, and/or cognitive
condition(s) preventing them from
engaging in community or clinical
activities that are available for their
peers with typical development.699
Therefore, creative solutions for
promoting physical activity and
healthy nutrition and behavior
change are vital for this special
population. Solutions come from
FIGURE 5
The ICF framework and the F-words.705 Used with permission.
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
59
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 60]
guidance and supervision from
families, health care providers, and
community recreation staff for
appropriate physical activities and
consumption of healthier food
options.700–702
It is essential to emphasize the
numerous benefits of recreational
activities for CYSHCN to include
improve socialization, fitness level,
and motor and movement
skills.703,704 Additional nutrition,
physical activity, and sedentary time
recommendations can be found in a
recent report from the Healthy
Weight Research Network, an
interdisciplinary group of clinical
investigators and experts providing
obesity treatment of children with
autism and other intellectual and/or
developmental disabilities.697
The International Classification
of Functioning (ICF), Disability,
and Health model and AAP
recommendations are appropriate
frameworks related to assessing
pertinent health conditions and
contextual factors affecting
CYSHCN to aid in planning to treat
obesity, as seen in Fig 5. The ICF
framework can be used to
organize approaches in the
management of childhood obesity.
Children with obesity-related
genetic syndromes, behavioral
difficulties, developmental
disabilities, and hypothalamic
disorders (Table 2) have added
obesity risk and may need
additional supports in obesity
treatment.316
Hyperphagia can be particularly
challenging to manage in CYSHCN. A
combination of specific behavioral
techniques within the context of
family-based behavioral treatment
and the use of pharmacotherapy
may be necessary.700
Prader Willi syndrome is a complex
genetic disorder affecting 1 in
15 000 to 1 in 30 000 people and
is associated with obesity and
hyperphagia.706,707 Specific
recommendations for health
supervision and multicomponent
care can help pediatricians and
other PHCPs institute a longitudinal
treatment approach to care.
Hypothalamic obesity is a
neuroendocrine disorder resulting
from damage to the hypothalamus,
disrupting the body’s energy
regulatory system, which requires
intensive multicomponent
treatment.708
ADHD is associated with obesity,
and symptoms such as deficits in
alertness and attention that are
caused by sleep-disordered
breathing attributable to obesity can
overlap with those of ADHD.
Impulsivity in ADHD may contribute
to dysregulated eating and weight
gain. Effective treatment of ADHD in
children with obesity can be
associated with attainment of
healthier weight status.709
I. Use of Pharmacotherapy
Consensus Recommendation
The CPG authors recommend
pediatricians and other PHCPs:

May offer children ages 8
through 11 years of age with
obesity weight loss pharmaco-
therapy, according to medication
indications, risks, and benefits, as
an adjunct to health behavior
and lifestyle treatment.
Although IHBLT has the largest
body of evidence meeting the
evidence review’s high-quality
evidence for effectiveness criteria, it
is important to consider the use of
pharmacotherapy for children and
adolescents who require an
additional treatment option to
manage their obesity. In particular,
children with more immediate and
life-threatening comorbidities, those
who are older, and those affected by
more severe obesity may require
additional therapeutic options. For
children younger than 12 years,
there is insufficient evidence to
provide a KAS for use of
pharmacotherapy for the sole
indication of obesity. There are,
however, specific conditions
outlined below for which use of
medication may be indicated.
Additionally, although the evidence
is insufficient at the time of this
KAS 12. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should offer adolescents 12 y and older with obesity (BMI $ 95th percentile) weight loss pharmacotherapy, according to medication indications, risks,
and beneﬁts, as an adjunct to health behavior and lifestyle treatment.
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
BMI reduction as an adjunct to lifestyle treatment.
Risks, harms, costs
Varies by pharmacotherapeutic agent.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Beneﬁt and harm are individualized by patient, must weigh the side effects and potential beneﬁt of the medication
and patient-speciﬁc factors.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient preference
Signiﬁcant; must determine appropriate timing and duration of treatment, monitor for side effects.
Exclusions
Medication-dependent exclusions.
Strengths
Moderate.
Key references
710
60
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 61]
evidence review, the use of
pharmacotherapy to aid BMI
reduction in children is a rapidly
evolving field; new evidence may
lead to additional options for
children younger than 12 years in
the future.
Studies Included
At the time of the evidence review
for this CPG, 27 randomized studies
met the inclusion criteria for review,
and an additional 8 observational
studies were also considered. The
majority of the studies evaluated the
efficacy of metformin either alone
(n 5 16 randomized, 7 observational)
or in combination with other
medications (n 5 7 randomized).
Other studies evaluated orlistat
(n 5 2 randomized), exenatide
(n 5 2 randomized), or other
medications with only 1 study cited
(phentermine, mixed carotenoids,
topiramate, ephedrine, and
recombinant human growth
hormone). Since the evidence review,
additional high-quality evidence has
been published to define the safety
and efficacy of novel agents
(setmelanotide, liraglutide, and the
combination phentermine or
topiramate) and are included in this
discussion.
Medication Use and Mechanisms of
Action
Metformin is an antidiabetic agent used
in T2DM among patients 10 years and
older. Metformin also has several
indications not approved by the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
including prediabetes, PCOS, and
prevention of weight gain when used
with atypical antipsychotic
medications. Metformin is a biguanide
drug that reduces blood glucose levels
by decreasing blood glucose
production in the liver, decreasing
intestinal absorption, and increasing
insulin sensitivity. It comes in
immediate- and extended-release
formulations; the recommended
starting dose is 500 mg, once or twice
daily, with gradual increases up to a
maximum total daily dose of 2500 mg.
Adverse effects are dose-dependent,
and include bloating, nausea, flatulence,
and diarrhea. Lactic acidosis is a
serious but very rare complication in
pediatric populations.711
Metformin has not been approved as
a weight-loss drug. A 2020 meta-
analysis of metformin studies in
adults with obesity showed modest
(<5%, or 1 BMI unit) weight
reduction with metformin when
used as an adjunct to lifestyle;
however, the effectiveness is
inconsistent across different
populations.712 The evidence for
effectiveness of metformin for
weight loss in pediatric populations
is similarly conflicting. One small
study randomized 39 teens 13 to
18 years of age with obesity
participating in a lifestyle modification
program to either metformin
hydrocholoride XR 2000 mg, or
placebo once daily for 48 weeks.713
Adolescents taking metformin reduced
BMI by approximately 1 kg/m2 as
compared with a slight increase in
BMI among teens in the lifestyle-only
program.
Another well-designed randomized
study of 100 children 6 to 12 years of
age with severe obesity (mean BMI
34.6 kg/m2) showed a BMI reduction
of approximately 1 kg/m2 at a dose of
1000 mg twice daily for 6 months,
also as an adjunct to lifestyle
treatment.714 Gastrointestinal
symptoms limited the tolerated
maximum dose in nearly 20% of
patients, however, and no additional
BMI reduction was noted with
treatment beyond 6 months. Of the
16 studies of metformin that met
quality inclusion criteria for the
evidence review, about two-thirds
showed modest BMI reduction.713–724
One-third showed no benefit.725–728
The effective studies typically
included higher metformin doses,
more intensive lifestyle adjunct
treatment, and use in children or
adolescents with more severe
obesity and/or a secondary
diagnosis, such as prediabetes or
PCOS. Given the modest and
inconsistent effectiveness,
metformin may be considered as an
adjunct to intensive health behavior
and lifestyle treatment and when
other indications for use of
metformin are present.
Orlistat is an intestinal lipase
inhibitor that blocks fat absorption
through inhibition of pancreatic and
gastric lipase. It is currently
approved for children 12 years and
older at a dose of 120 mg, 3 times
per day. Adverse effects include
steatorrhea, fecal urgency, and
flatulence; these adverse effects
greatly limit tolerability, and thus,
orlistat is uncommonly used in
pediatric obesity treatment. Orlistat
is FDA approved for long-term
treatment of obesity in children
12 years and older.729,730
Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor
agonists, such as liraglutide,
exenatide, dulaglutide, and
semaglutide, decrease hunger by
slowing gastric emptying and by
acting on targets in the central
nervous system. Depending on the
medication, the formulation is either
oral or a daily or weekly
subcutaneous injection. Two small
studies of exenatide (weekly
injection) among children as young
as 8 years showed BMI reduction
ranging from 0.9 to 1.18 U but with
significant adverse effects. Exenatide
is currently approved in children 10
to 17 years of age with T2DM. A
recent randomized controlled trial
found liraglutide (daily injection)
more effective than placebo in
weight loss at 1 year among patients
12 years and older with obesity who
did not respond to lifestyle
treatment.710 The magnitude of the
difference was approximately 4.5 kg
body weight lost, or 5% BMI
reduction. The starting dose is 0.6 mg
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
61
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 62]
per day up to a maximum dose of
3.0 mg per day, by subcutaneous
injection. Adverse effects include
nausea and vomiting, and among
patients with a family history of
multiple endocrine neoplasia, a
slightly increased risk of medullary
thyroid cancer.710 Liraglutide is FDA
approved for long-term treatment of
obesity (with or without T2DM) in
children 12 years and older.
Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R)
agonists, such as setmelanotide, act
on the MC4R pathway to restore
normal function for appetite
regulation that has been disrupted
because of genetic deficits upstream
of the MC4 receptor. MC4 receptors
in the brain regulate hunger, satiety,
and energy expenditure. The daily
dose is 1 to 3 mg daily, given
subcutaneously, and results in
weight loss of 12% to 25% over
1 year in a small, uncontrolled study
of patients with these rare deficits.
Common adverse effects include
injection site reaction and nausea.
Setmelanotide is FDA approved for
patients 6 years and older with
proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
deficiency, proprotein subtilisin or
kexin type 1 deficiency, and leptin
receptor deficiency confirmed by
genetic testing.
Phentermine is a central
norepinephrine uptake inhibitor but
also nonselectively inhibits
serotonin and dopamine reuptake
and reduces appetite. Recommended
doses include 7.5 mg, 15 mg, 30 mg,
or 37.5 mg, and adverse effects
include elevated BP, dizziness,
headache, tremor, dry mouth, and
stomachache. Adverse effects are
dose-dependent; however,
effectiveness does not always
increase with increasing dose.
Phentermine is FDA approved for
short-course therapy (3 months) for
adolescents 16 years or older.
Topiramate is a carbonic anhydrase
inhibitor and suppresses appetite
centrally through largely unknown
mechanisms. The major adverse
effect is cognitive slowing, which
can interfere with academic
concentration or other activities of
daily living. In addition, topiramate
is a potential teratogen and requires
counseling and reliable birth control
for patients able to become
pregnant. Typical dosing for
headache prevention ranges from
25 mg a day to 100 mg a day in
twice daily doses. Although
topiramate has an indication for
treatment of binge eating disorder
in adults (age $ 18), only 1 study
has evaluated the use of topiramate
in children, and it did not differ
from placebo. Topiramate is
currently FDA approved for children
2 years and older with epilepsy and
for headache prevention in children
12 years and older.
Phentermine and topiramate as a
combination medication is approved
for weight loss in adults. Recent
data show that among adolescents
12 to 17 years of age with
documented history of failure to
lose sufficient weight or failure to
maintain weight loss in a lifestyle
modification program (mean age,
14 years; mean BMI, 37.8 kg/m2),
BMI percent change at 56 weeks
was -10.44 (high dose; 15 mg/
92 mg) and 8.11 (mid dose;
7.5 mg/46 mg) as compared with
placebo.731 Treatment also improved
HDL and TG cholesterol profiles.
Adverse events reported were not
more common than placebo in the
high- or mid-dose range.
Lisdexamfetamine is similar in
mechanism to phentermine and is a
stimulant-class medication approved
for children 6 years and older with
ADHD. It has an indication for
treatment of binge eating disorder
in patients 18 years and older; thus,
it is used off-label for children with
obesity. However, no evidence is
available at the time of this review
to demonstrate safety or efficacy for
the indication of obesity in children.
Prescriber Qualifications
Weight loss medications require the
same oversight and expertise in
management as other medications
used in pediatric care. To
adequately inform patients and
parents about the risks and benefits
of off-label or experimental use of
new therapies, pediatricians and
other PHCPs who prescribe weight
loss medications should have
knowledge of the patient selection
criteria, medication efficacy, adverse
effects, and follow-up monitoring
guidelines. In addition, injectable
medications may require additional
teaching for families that is not
available in all primary care offices.
Pediatricians and other PHCPs may
choose to refer to pediatric obesity
experts or treatment centers for
prescribing weight loss medication.
No current evidence supports
weight loss medication use as a
monotherapy; thus, pediatricians
and other PHCPs who prescribe
weight loss medication to children
should provide or refer to intensive
behavioral interventions for patients
and families as an adjunct to
medication therapy.
J. Pediatric Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery
It is widely accepted that the most
severe forms of pediatric obesity (ie,
$class 2 obesity; BMI $ 35 kg/m2,
or 120% of the 95th percentile for
age and sex, whichever is lower)
represent an “epidemic within an
epidemic.” Moreover, severe obesity
is a harbinger of the establishment
and cumulative progression of
numerous related comorbidities,
diminished long-term health status,
and shortened life expectancy.654,739
For adults, the evidence supporting
the clinical indications and
associated recommendations on the
use of metabolic and bariatric
62
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 63]
surgery is founded on a body of
literature that has been expanding
since the early 1960s.740
Corresponding analyses related to
the use of various surgical weight
loss procedures in pediatric
populations have been primarily
established in the last 20 to
30 years. Large contemporary and
well-designed prospective
observational studies have
compared adolescent cohorts
undergoing bariatric surgical
treatment versus intensive obesity
treatment or nonsurgical controls.
These studies suggest that weight
loss surgery is safe and effective for
pediatric patients in comprehensive
metabolic and bariatric surgery
settings that have experience
working with youth and their
families. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass and vertical sleeve
gastrectomy are both commonly
performed in the pediatric age
group and result in significant and
sustained weight loss, accompanied
by improvements and/or resolution
of numerous related comorbid
conditions.732 Laparoscopic
adjustable gastric band procedures,
approved by the FDA only for
patients 18 years and older, have
declined in use in both adults and
youth because of worse long-term
effects as well as higher-than-
expected complication
rates.647,652,654,655,706,732–736,739–744
Similar to the adult experience, an
expanding body of data shows that
pediatric bariatric patients also
experience durable reduction in
BMI,152,744–748 as well as significant
improvement and/or complete
amelioration of several obesity-related
comorbid conditions. These
include HTN, T2DM, dyslipidemia,
cardiovascular disease risk factors, and
weight-related quality of life.152,654,734
Furthermore, recent evidence
showing that adolescents had a
higher probability of remission of
certain cardiometabolic risk factors
(T2DM and HTN) compared with
adults highlights the argument that
earlier surgical intervention may
impart specific advantages related to
the cumulative impact of chronic
obesity-related diseases.736 The
significantly lower magnitude of
efficacy of intensive behavioral
interventions—compared with
larger and more durable
improvements in BMI and
comorbidity resolution after
metabolic and bariatric surgery—
has led to a significant increase in
pediatric bariatric surgical case
volume since the early 2000s.126
The majority of complications following
metabolic and bariatric surgery in the
pediatric population are minor (15%),
occur mostly in the early postoperative
timeframe, and consist of a
combination of postoperative nausea
and/or dehydration, although major
perioperative (30-day) complications
have been reported in 8% of
individuals.654,733 Subsequent related
procedures may be required in 13% to
25% of patients up to 5 years
following metabolic and bariatric
surgery.744,746,747 In addition, recent
data showing multiple micronutrient
deficiencies following metabolic and
bariatric surgery serve to highlight the
need for routine and long-term
monitoring.
KAS 13. Pediatricians and other PHCPs should offer referral for adolescents 13 y and older with severe obesity (BMI $ 120% of the 95th percentile for age and sex) for evaluation for
metabolic and bariatric surgery to local or regional comprehensive multidisciplinary pediatric metabolic and bariatric surgery centers.
Aggregate Evidence Quality
Grade Ca
Beneﬁts
Referral for evaluation to a comprehensive pediatric metabolic and bariatric surgery center may result in the
determination of eligibility for laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass or vertical sleeve gastrectomy, which are both
associated with signiﬁcant and sustained weight loss, accompanied by improvements and/or resolution of
numerous related comorbid conditions, remission of certain cardiometabolic risk factors, and improvements in
weight-related quality of life.
Risks, harms, costs
Minor perioperative risks may occur in up to 15% of patients, and major perioperative risks may occur in up to 8%
of patients. Subsequent related procedures may be required in 13% to 25% of patients up to 5 y following surgery.
Vitamin deﬁciencies are common and need long-term monitoring and potential intervention. Health care costs and
costs to families (eg, time, recovery).
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
Perioperative risks considered within acceptable tolerances compared with other elective surgical abdominal
procedures. Beneﬁt and harm are patient-speciﬁc with generally accepted safety proﬁles within the context of
perceived long-term post-procedural beneﬁts (ie, reduction in comorbid disease burden), resulting in improved
health status and quality of life.
Intentional vagueness
This action statement does not recommend surgery for all who have severe obesity but rather the opportunity for
children, adolescents, and families to consider and undergo evaluation.
Role of patient preference
Signiﬁcant; must determine appropriate timing of intervention and comprehension of treatment plan.
Exclusions
Not applicable.
Strength
Moderate.
Key references
126, 654, 732–738
a This KAS was given a Grade C recommendation, as available evidence is from observational and case-controlled studies. As described in the methods section for the evidence re-
view, only randomized and comparative effectiveness studies were included for the CPG. The Evidence Review Panel made the decision to include observational and case-control
studies speciﬁcally for surgical interventions only, because of ethical considerations and practical challenges to randomization.
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
63
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 64]
Although the determination of
eligibility for metabolic and
bariatric surgery relies heavily on a
multicomponent and individualized
approach between members of the
metabolic and bariatric surgery team,
the patient, and the patient’s parents
or guardians, initial steps toward
consideration should be provided,
when appropriate, within the medical
home. Specifically, pediatricians and
other PHCPs should be familiar with
recent and clearly defined clinical and
anthropometric benchmarks, which
serve as a prompt for the initiation of
these discussions with the patient
and family and ongoing bilateral
communication between the medical
home and surgical center654,733
(Table 20). In addition to knowledge of
indications for metabolic and bariatric
surgery, pediatricians and other PHCPs
should build and maintain skills in
discussing this topic with families in a
nonbiased and sensitive manner.
Pediatricians and other PHCPs should
also seek to establish a local and/or
regional referral mechanism to
qualified facilities that offer pediatric-
focused metabolic and bariatric
surgical services.
Individual determination of eligibility
status at the time of referral to a
center that offers metabolic and
bariatric surgical intervention for the
pediatric population involves a
comprehensive and multidisciplinary
assessment of longitudinal BMI and
comorbidity status as well as
physiologic and psychosocial
assessment, including the
determination of potential
contraindications such as correctable
causes of obesity, ongoing substance
use disorder, and pregnancy.
Important elements include the
ability to determine the patient’s and
family’s capacity to understand the
risks and benefits of metabolic and
bariatric surgery and adhere to
required lifestyle modifications
leading up to and following such
intervention. The evaluative process
is rooted in a framework of
thoughtful, shared decision making
between the patient, parents(s) and/
or guardian(s), and medical and
surgical providers and ideally
includes coordinated and ongoing
communication with the patient’s
medical home.654,733
A referral to a comprehensive
metabolic and bariatric surgery
center with experience and
expertise in treatment of patients
younger than 18 years does not
necessarily mean the child will
ultimately have surgery. This
referral provides the family with
important information and
additional evaluation of risks and
benefits for use in making an
informed decision. In the case of
younger children, recommendations
for referral to a comprehensive
multidisciplinary obesity treatment
center with surgical capability
should be considered on a case-by-
case basis.
Although data addressing surgical
intervention in the younger age
group are limited, recent
comparative analysis show
sustained efficacy and similar safety
profiles when compared with
adolescents.737,738 Additional
research is needed before broad
recommendations can be made for
children 12 years and younger.
Age is not the sole determinant of
eligibility for metabolic and bariatric
surgery. The pediatrician or other
PHCP should take into account the
patient’s physical and psychosocial
needs. Evaluation for metabolic and
bariatric surgery should include a
holistic view of the patient and
family, including individual and
social risk factors. Families should
be fully informed of the benefits and
risks of metabolic and bariatric
surgery, and their preferences are
paramount. As highlighted in a
recent AAP policy statement, the
decision to continue care with a
pediatrician or pediatric medical or
surgical subspecialist should be
made solely by the patient (and the
family, as appropriate).749
Insurance authorization is a key
consideration for individuals
considering metabolic and bariatric
surgical intervention regardless of
age; however, data highlight a
significant disparity regarding benefit
coverage when comparing pediatric
versus adult populations.126 Efforts
to determine coverage availability,
including potential mitigation
strategies designed to address
coverage gaps, should be the focus of
early discussions between the family,
medical home, and metabolic and
bariatric surgical specialty providers.
Children and adolescents who are
referred for evaluation for metabolic
and bariatric surgery should have
this referral visit covered, and those
who are deemed eligible for
metabolic and bariatric surgery
TABLE 20 Criteria for Pediatric Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery733
Weight Criteria
Criteria for Comorbid Conditions
Class 2 obesity, BMI $ 35 kg/m2 or 120% of the 95th percentile for age
and sex, whichever is lower
Clinically signiﬁcant disease; examples include but are not limited to
T2DM, IIH, NASH, Blount disease, SCFE, GERD, obstructive sleep apnea
(AHI >5), cardiovascular disease risks (HTN, hyperlipidemia, insulin
resistance), depressed health-related quality of life.
Class 3 obesity, BMI $ 40 kg/m2 or 140% of the 95th percentile for age
and sex, whichever is lower
Not required but commonly present.
AHI, apnea-hypopnea index.
64
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 65]
should have their preparation visits,
the surgery itself, hospitalization,
postoperative visits, and ongoing
care covered.
K. Comprehensive Obesity Treatment
(COT) for Children and Adolescents
The essential components of COT of
children and adolescents include
treatment of the obesity as a chronic
disease and evaluation and
management of comorbidities. This
treatment is delivered by primary
care providers and their teams, in
collaboration with pediatric obesity
specialists, allied health providers,
community partners, and metabolic
and bariatric surgery teams.
COT: COT includes79,80:

Providing intensive, longitudinal
treatment in the medical home

Evaluating and monitoring child
or adolescent for obesity-related
medical and psychological
comorbidities

Identifying and addressing social
drivers of health

Using nonstigmatizing ap-
proaches to clinical treatment
that honor unique individual
qualities of each child and family

Using MI that addresses nutri-
tion, physical activity, and health
behavior change using evidence-
based targets for weight reduc-
tion and health promotion

Setting collaborative treatment
goals not limited to BMI stabiliza-
tion or reduction, including goals
that reflect improvement or reso-
lution of comorbidities, quality of
life, self-image, and other goals re-
lated to holistic care

Integrating weight management
components and strategies across
appropriate disciplines, which
can include intensive health
behavior and lifestyle treatment,
with pharmacotherapy and
metabolic and bariatric surgery if
indicated

Tailoring treatment to the
ongoing and changing needs of
the individual child or adoles-
cent and the family and
community context
Who delivers COT? Ideally, primary
care teams and pediatric weight
management specialty teams will
partner to provide COT for children
and adolescents with obesity.
Primary care providers evaluate for
obesity, evaluate for comorbidities,
and provide patient-centered and
evidence-based nutrition and
physical activity guidance, using MI.
Some primary care practices may
also be able to provide IHBLT and
pharmacotherapeutic options.
IHBLT, regardless of where it is
delivered, requires the allocation of
significantly more time and
resources than are typical in the
provision of routine well childcare.
Coordination in the medical home
with additional professionals, such
as dietitians, exercise specialists and
behavioral health practitioners, will
depend on the child’s COT plan and
available resources. Pediatric health
care providers can augment COT
with referral to community
resources and programs (see
algorithm in Appendix 1).
XII. SYSTEMS OF CARE FOR CHILDREN
WITH OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY
Obesity is a chronic disease—similar
to asthma and diabetes. Children
and adolescents with obesity have
the potential to benefit from the
foundational standards for systems
of care designed for children and
youth with special health care
needs.153,750 CYSHCN are defined as
“those who have or are at increased
risk for a chronic physical,
developmental, behavioral, or
emotional condition and who also
require health and related services
of a type or amount beyond that
required by children generally.”74
The principles of the chronic care
model and the medical home that
can also benefit children with
obesity include the following:
A. Provision of Evidence-based Care
All care provided to children and
youth with obesity and their
families should be evidence based
where possible; where evidence-
based approaches do not exist, care
should be evidence informed and/or
based on promising practices.
As pediatric obesity becomes an
increasing public health issue and
recognizable chronic disease, it
becomes critical to rely on evidence-
based medicine and or expert
recommendations to establish
prevention, assessment, and
treatment of obesity. To date,
several guidelines have been
developed and updated to address
obesity in children. Examples
include “Pediatric Obesity—
Assessment, Treatment, and
Prevention: An Endocrine Society
Clinical Practice Guideline,” and
“Expert Committee Recommendations
Regarding the Prevention,
Assessment, and Treatment of Child
and Adolescent Overweight and
Obesity.” These guidelines have been
critical in moving forward with the
prevention, assessment, and
treatment of obesity in children as
new research is conducted and more
new evidence becomes available. This
CPG adds to this body of
knowledge.15,268,685
B. Partnership With Children and
Families
Children and families of children
and youth with obesity should be
active and core partners in decision
making in all levels of care.
Patient-centered care involves not
only an understanding of the family’s
social and cultural context but also an
appreciation for their desires as
decisions are made about obesity
treatment. Family desire for treatment
should not be assumed despite
attendance at primary care or
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
65
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 66]
specialty weight management visits.
Pediatricians’ and other PHCPs’ use of
MI techniques can, however, reinforce
the importance of family-driven
treatment decisions and foster
families’ internal motivation that can
sustain treatment. As a relationship is
built with the family, MI can form the
foundation for shared decision making
between pediatricians (and other
PHCPs) and families about treatment
continuation and intensification.751
The advent of parent and patient
EHR portals has enabled
bidirectional communication
between families and health care
teams and can facilitate shared
decision making in obesity treatment.
Additional facilitators may include
tools featuring direct input from
families, such as care plans and care
coordination agreements.752
A patient decision aid to promote
shared decision-making about
options for adolescent severe obesity
treatment was found to be feasible
and acceptable by pediatricians (and
other pediatric health care
providers) and families.753
C. Provision of Health Care That
Recognizes Cultural Values
All services and supports for
children and youth with obesity and
their families should be
implemented and delivered in a
linguistically appropriate and
accessible manner that recognizes
cultural values.
All written materials provided
to children and youth with
obesity and their families should
be culturally appropriate and in a
manner and format appropriate
for children and their parents or
caregivers who have limited
English proficiency, lower levels of
literacy, or sensory impairments.
With families with limited
English proficiency, vigilance
is needed to also provide a
trained interpreter and use
growth charts in educating about
obesity.754
D. Medical Home
Children With Obesity Should be Cared
for in a Medical Home
The benefits of a medical home for
children and youth with obesity
include streamlined care, efficient
use of resources (home-, school-,
and community-based services),
expanded expertise and
competence for the involved
providers, establishment of a forum
for problem solving, and improved
satisfaction for the patient, family,
and provider. Primary care
providers can help identify children
early as obesity is developing and
base intervention efforts on family
dynamics and reduction in high-risk
dietary and activity behaviors.755
Linkages should also be established
between primary care practices and
obesity treatment clinics to
coordinate care with obesity
specialists when necessary (eg,
psychologist, dietitian, physician).
The medical home also provides an
effective model for implementing
successful transitions to adult-
oriented systems to treat obesity.
E. Transition to Adult Primary Care
Providers
Children and adolescents with obesity
should have a plan for a transition of
care to adult primary care providers.
Transition of care for children with
obesity to adult primary care
providers is an important field for
which evidence and
recommendations have been
developing. Generally, the concept of
transition of care highlights the
importance of the collaboration of
the primary and/or subspecialty
pediatric, adolescent, or family
medicine care team, with the adult
provider who is preparing to
assume the role of primary care
provider for a young adult. The
importance of a formal transition
plan has been shown in children
with diabetes mellitus, sickle cell
disease, and congenital heart
disease.468,756–762 Specifically,
transition of care plans have been
shown to improve knowledge and
self-efficacy and help to integrate
the young adult into a new medical
home or neighborhood.757,761,763,764
The transition of care literature for
childhood obesity is limited but
growing.752,765,766 In general,
transition of care for obesity
involves the development of specific
goals and a timeline for the
transition.759 This also includes the
development of a registry type
system to track and alert
pediatricians and other PHCPs when
a child reaches the age of 12 years
so that outreach to the family to
start the transition process can
occur.468,762,763 It is generally
understood that timing of these
discussions and the actual transition
of care to an adult primary care
provider(s) or team depends on the
individual needs of the patient and
family as well as developmental and
neurocognitive abilities. It is also
understood that these discussions
should be ongoing, at least annually.
It is highly recommended that the
providers and teams should be in
direct communication with each
other. Peer support groups are also
highly recommended to assist the
patient and family and to provide a
peer network as part of the medical
home.752,767
The complex nature of obesity
management and care, including the
structured changes involved in
behavioral strategies, the connection
with community-based programs,
and the need for medication therapy
and surgery for a number of
children and adolescents with
obesity highlights the importance of
a coordinated transition plan,
frequent communication with the
66
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 67]
patient and family, and between
providers and teams early
on.752,765,766,768,770
XIII. BARRIERS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CPG
IMPLEMENTATION
Pediatricians and other PHCPs and
families face numerous barriers to
promoting healthy, active lifestyles
and to supporting obesity treatment
among children. The successful
implementation of this CPG into
routine practice requires careful
consideration of barriers and
facilitators at the policy, community,
practice, and provider level that can
modify implementation,
effectiveness, and sustainability.
A. Policy Level
At the forefront of the policy-level
barriers to the implementation of
these guidelines are both direct and
indirect costs that are associated
with recommended evaluation and
effective treatment of obesity. In
2010 and again in 2017, the USPSTF
designated a grade B classification
for evidence of effectiveness of
childhood obesity screening and
high-intensity, family-based
behavioral treatment.79 Although a
grade B designation should secure
reliable insurance payment under
the statutes of the Affordable Care
Act , the lack of payment by insurers
remains a major barrier to
childhood obesity treatment.769,770
There is currently no consistent
coverage of other evidence-based
treatment strategies not explicitly
included in the USPSTF
recommendation.
Direct costs to families include
payment for obesity evaluation and
treatment that insurers do not pay
for, as well as insurance plans with
high deductibles or copays. These
cost barriers make it difficult for
families to access care, obtain
laboratory testing, attend follow-up
visits, and initiate and/or complete
treatment programs. Differences in
payment policies between public
and private insurers and restrictive
provider networks can make it
challenging for pediatricians and
other PHCPs to achieve consistent
management practices. The overall
lack of financial support from either
insurance companies or families’
inability to pay for treatment
programs disincentivizes the
expansion of their availability, and
there have not been robust studies
on best practices for scaling up and
sustaining effective treatment
programs.
For patients and families, efforts to
implement the recommendations for
behavior change are also associated
with indirect costs (such as time
and costs associated with healthier
foods and exercise) and are heavily
impacted by policies at the federal,
state, and local level. These policies
include agricultural subsidies, school
nutrition, and physical activity
standards and curricula, zoning and
public spaces to promote safe
physical activity, tax deductions for
direct advertising of unhealthy foods
to minors, and nutrition
labeling.771–773 As the recent AAP
policy statement on the role of
racism in child health and well-
being notes, the long-standing
structural racism that has plagued
these policies manifests in the form
of limited access to high-quality
education, safe neighborhoods for
active play, healthy food, and health
care for people of certain races and
ethnicities.52,774
One simulation-based cost
effectiveness analysis of multiple
interventions for childhood obesity
found that 3 policies were estimated
to be cost-saving; in other words,
they would save more in health care
costs through reduction in obesity
prevalence than it would cost to
implement.771 The policies are:
(1) implementing an excise tax on
SSBs; (2) elimination of the tax
deduction for companies advertising
unhealthy foods to children; and
(3) improving nutrition standards
for food and beverages sold in
schools outside of meals. Another
simulation study projected that an
excise tax on SSBs, banning child-
directed advertising of fast food, and
providing after-school physical
activity programs would all reduce
obesity prevalence while also
reducing disparities.773
Implementation Consensus
Recommendation 1: The
subcommittee recommends that
the AAP and its membership
strongly promote supportive
payment and public health policies
that cover comprehensive obesity
prevention, evaluation, and
treatment. The medical costs of
untreated childhood obesity are
well-documented and add urgency
to provide payment for
treatment.122 There is a role for
AAP policy and advocacy, in
partnership with other
organizations, to demand more of
our government to accelerate
progress in prevention and
treatment of obesity for all children
through policy change within and
beyond the health care sector to
improve the health and well-being
of children. Furthermore, targeted
policies are needed to purposefully
address the structural racism in
our society that drives the
alarming and persistent disparities
in childhood obesity and obesity-
related comorbidities.
B. Community and Population Level
At the community and population
level, SDoHs can limit the
implementation and prioritization of
health behavior recommendations
(including counseling on nutrition,
physical activity, sleep, and screen
time) for both pediatricians (or
other PHCPs) and families. These
SDoHs include food security, safe
neighborhoods and housing, health
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
67
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 68]
literacy, weight-related parenting
skills, household chaos, and access
to transportation.
Many communities lack access to
evidence-based, high-intensity
weight management programs for
treatment, either in clinical or
community-based settings.775,776
Telehealth and mobile technologies
are emerging as a potential means
to close this access gap, but little is
known about the effectiveness of
pediatric weight management
treatments via these modalities.777
The well-described digital divide
may also limit their utility among
populations disproportionately
impacted by obesity.778,779 A failure
to consider these factors could lead
to worsening disparities.
The recent iteration of the Obesity
Chronic Care Model proposes an
integrated framework for the
prevention and treatment of
obesity.521,780 The framework
discusses the importance of
coordinating and integrating
approaches to address obesity
across clinical and community
systems as well as stakeholders.
In doing so, an integrated approach
strives to identify and address
barriers to equitable implementation,
access to healthier options, and data
sharing. An important part of
integration includes the identification
of an integrator or convener that
brings stakeholders together in a
collaborative effort to address
population health. Integrators are
essential to addressing social
determinants of health and complex
problems that no single stakeholder
can address.
Implementation Consensus
Recommendation 2: The
subcommittee recommends that
public health agencies, community
organizations, health care
systems, health care providers,
and community members partner
with each other to expand access
to evidence-based pediatric
obesity treatment programs and
to increase community resources
that address social determinants
of health in promoting healthy,
active lifestyles.521
C. Practice and Provider Level
At the practice and provider level,
classic barriers to implementation of
guidelines include the lack of time,
resources, knowledge, awareness,
self-efficacy (confidence in one’s
ability to perform a behavior), and
outcome expectancy (the belief that
a recommended behavior will lead
to a specific effect).781 Evidence
indicates that clinical decision
support (CDS) can be delivered
through EHR systems to help
overcome some of these practice-
and provider-level barriers and
improve evaluation and effective
management. Evidence-based CDS
tools include assessment
components (ie, flagging abnormal
heights, weights, and BMIs) and
provision of suggestions for obesity
treatment, such as order sets for
recommended laboratory tests or
other follow-up actions.529,782–784
Most pediatric providers currently
use EHRs that calculate and plot
BMI; however, limitations of EHR
systems hinder rapid dissemination
and implementation of innovations
to support practice.785–787
Implementation Consensus
Recommendation 3: The
subcommittee recommends that
EHR vendors, health systems, and
practices implement CDS systems
broadly in EHRs to provide
prompts and facilitate best
practices for managing children
and adolescents with obesity.
At the same time, EHRs can only do so
much and are ineffective in the
absence of a clinical workforce that is
knowledgeable about evidence-based
obesity treatment and skilled in
delivering high-quality, patient-centered
care that will yield improved health
outcomes for children with obesity.
The recent AAP policy statement on
weight stigma highlights the
detrimental effects of weight bias and
ineffective approaches to the diagnosis
and management of obesity.28
Implementation Consensus
Recommendation 4: The
subcommittee recommends that
medical and other health
professions schools, training
programs, boards, and professional
societies improve education and
training opportunities related to
obesity for both practicing providers
and in preprofessional schools and
residency and fellowship programs.
Such training includes the
underlying physiologic basis for
weight dysregulation, MI, weight
bias, the social and emotional
impact of obesity on patients, the
need to tailor management to
SDoHs that impact weight, and
weight-related outcomes and other
emerging science.
XIV. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Research in the field of pediatric
overweight and obesity has rapidly
increased over the past decade and
supports the evidence-based
recommendations and guidelines
contained in this CPG on the
assessment and management of
pediatric overweight and obesity.
Although research has progressed in
these areas, significant gaps remain
and are described in detail in the
accompanying technical reports. The
gaps and limitations that are most
relevant to pediatricians and other
PHCPs treating children with obesity
include duration and heterogeneity
of treatment effects and limits in our
understanding of how specific
treatment components interact.

Duration of treatment effects.
Limited research with long-term
follow-up exists to determine:
68
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 69]
(1) whether treatment leads to
sustained weight improvements,
and (2) how comorbidities de-
velop throughout childhood. Lon-
ger-term data are needed to
establish sufficient weight loss or
cardiovascular improvements
influencing health into adulthood.

Heterogeneity of treatment
effects and special populations.
Current research does not pro-
vide sufficient information about
the heterogeneity of treatment
effects for obesity interventions,
limiting our ability to identify
which treatment is most likely to
be effective for a specific child.
Many factors may increase obe-
sity risk and impact treatment
course but are poorly isolated in
studies to date. These factors
may include geographical region,
food insecurity, poverty, ACEs,
and other social drivers. Perhaps
most importantly, severity of
obesity has not been clearly con-
sidered in most interventions,
and treatment is likely to have
different effectiveness in children
with greater severity of disease.
Similar to obesity research, most
research on treatment and co-
morbidities use relatively restric-
tive inclusion criteria, excluding
children with comorbidities
(including mental health condi-
tions), children with physical
activity limitations, children with
disabilities, or those using medi-
cations. In clinical practice, these
children often have the greatest
need for support in addressing
obesity.

Limited understanding of
specific components, dose, and
duration. Published intervention
studies often provided limited
information about the dose,
duration, and specifics of the
intervention components.80 This
limitation makes it difficult to
provide detailed information
about specific intervention
content, behavior change
techniques, and approaches to
improve retention and family
motivation. Further, the limited
research on potential synergies
among lifestyle intervention com-
ponents as well as pharmaceuti-
cal and
surgical interventions prevents
the development of individual-
ized treatment plans tailored to a
child’s weight and health status,
motivation, and readiness.
Despite these limitations, half of the
lifestyle randomized-control trials
reviewed were effective in reducing
adiposity. Reports of future studies
detailing specific treatment
components, implementation of
behavioral approaches, provider
involvement in clinical practice, and
the socioeconomic and cultural
context of the family and community
are needed to better understand
which interventions work, for
whom, and in what situations.
In addition to these critical areas for
future research, there are other
limitations that should be considered
in the context of the guidelines.
For comorbidity assessment, studies
were mostly cross-sectional, limiting
the ability to assess within-individual
changes in comorbidity prevalence
across age and obesity class and,
therefore, guidance on the appropriate
age to begin laboratory evaluation for
cardiometabolic comorbidities.
Epidemiologic studies intended for
specific age ranges and that examine
comorbidity prevalence across
different levels of overweight and
obesity would help identify specific
ages and BMI classes with increased
prevalence of cardiometabolic
comorbidities to focus further
research. Longitudinal studies would
also help identify the optimal age and
BMI ranges to begin evaluation and
are needed to monitor progression of
comorbidity related to age and BMI
level and provide guidance on the
recommended frequency of
comorbidity reevaluation. Consistent
thresholds of laboratory values across
studies are also needed.
Although many treatment studies
examined change in biomedical
outcomes as markers of secondary
prevention of comorbidities, few
studies in primary care evaluated
outcomes other than BMI.
Additionally, studies that assess if
comorbidity assessment and/or
diagnosis influences patient and
family engagement in weight
management treatment are lacking.
The role of SDoHs and culture in the
treatment of obesity comorbidities
is also limited. Studies examining
motivation for behavior change
related to health outcomes and
inclusion of SDOH factors in
treatment outcomes are needed.
Finally, most studies provided no or
very limited assessment of harms or
unintended consequences. In
general, behavioral interventions
carry low-risk of harms; this is not
well-documented in the existing
literature, however, as few studies
report adverse events.
The scope of the evidence review
for this CPG did not include primary
prevention of obesity or assessment
and treatment of children 0 to
2 years of age. Early prevention of
obesity is important, as 1 in 7
preschool-aged children already
have obesity, and disparities in
obesity are evident in the first years
of life.3 Identification and guidance
on treatment strategies in this
population are needed. Resources
for primary prevention in children
of all ages and treatment of children
younger than 2 years can be found
on the AAP Institute for Healthy
Childhood Weight’s Web site (www.
ihcw.aap.org) and are also provided
in the implementation materials.
Future CPGs should incorporate the
voices of caregivers, children or ado-
lescents, and organizations that rep-
resent families to lend important
context.
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
69
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 70]
In addition to the above, a list of
other gaps and considerations for
further research are provided in
Table 21.
XV. CONCLUSION—PUTTING IT ALL
TOGETHER
Pediatricians and other PHCPs now
have more evidence-based tools than
ever before that support obesity
treatment that is effective, provides
ongoing health benefits, supports
children and families longitudinally, and
reduces potential harms for disordered
eating. In contrast to previous
recommendations, these clinical
guidelines highlight the urgency of
providing immediate, intensive obesity
treatment to each patient as soon as
they receive the diagnosis of obesity.
As highlighted in the previous
sections, there are Key Action
Statements (KASs) that, collectively,
comprise a holistic patient-centered
approach to COT that should be
coordinated within the context of
TABLE 21 List of Gaps
Type of Gap
Example of Gap
Epidemiology
 Key drivers of reducing obesity prevalence
 Predictors of severe obesity
 Factors associated with obesity among racial and ethnic groups, including impact of
SDoHs on disparities
 Identiﬁcation of medical costs associated with obesity and comorbidities
Deﬁnition or measurement
 Alternative, accurate measurements of adiposity in primary care;
 BMI trajectories in clinical practice and response to treatment over time;
 BMI trajectories and development of comorbid conditions;
 BMI status and trajectories among race/ethnic groups and the impact of social drivers on
BMI status and trajectories
Risk factors
 Mechanism by which maternal obesity predisposes to adverse outcomes in the offspring
 Impact of sedentary behavior alone on BMI and comorbidities
 Improved understanding of associations between obesity and food insecurity
Comorbidities
 Age to begin evaluation for cardiometabolic comorbidities
 Frequency of evaluation to monitor progression of comorbidity
 Comorbidity identiﬁcation as motivation for behavior change
 Role of social determinants of health in obesity comorbidities, especially among minority
populations
 Role of social determinants of health in obesity comorbidities
Treatment
 Tailored age-based treatment approaches
 Evidence-based treatment options for 0–5 5 year-olds
 Optimal level of parent involvement among adolescents in weight management
 Optimizing MI use with respect to training, ﬁdelity to the MI process, and potential patient
characteristics
 Evidence for speciﬁc components of intensive lifestyle intervention on BMI trajectory in
clinical practice
 Approaches to intensive lifestyle intervention that are most effective, including clustering
of behavioral recommendations, messaging, delivery, and implementation, especially in
primary care
 Optimal duration of treatment, including strategies to address attrition and sustainability
 Adverse events of treatment
 Treatment outcomes by age, degree of obesity, and social determinants of health
 Studies reporting long term outcomes are limited
 Paucity of published studies reporting negative outcomes
 Evaluation of intervention on quality of life and mental health
 Studies of EHR tools, including clinical decision support, to improve attention to weight,
counseling, and referral
 Telemedicine and electronic and mobile health approaches
 Robust community programs with clinical linkages
 Cultural considerations in wt management
Systems of care
 Feasibility of application and beneﬁts of recommended systems of care for CYSHCN in
obesity, including care transition strategies on the adolescents’ and young adult’s
improvements in the treatment of obesity and health outcomes
Barriers to and facilitators of CPG implementation
 Evidence informing best practices for rapid, cost-effective, and sustainable scale up of
effective treatment program for childhood obesity that balance ﬁdelity with adaptability to
unique contexts
 Research addressing the inconclusive evidence around technology-based interventions for
obesity prevention777
CPG, clinical practice guideline; CYSHCN, children and youth with special health care needs; EHR, electronic health record; MI, motivational interviewing.
70
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 71]
the medical home. These strategies
form the basis for applying
evidence-based approaches that take
the child’s health status, family
system, community context, and
resources for treatment into
consideration to create the best
evidence-based treatment plan for
each individual child. Obesity is a
complex chronic disease but societal
stigma around obesity results in
pervasive weight bias. This makes
compassionate and sensitive
communication with patients and
families even more imperative
(see the Communication of BMI and
Weight Status to Children and
Parents section).
It is important to recognize that
treatment of obesity is integral to
the treatment of its comorbidities
and overweight or obesity and
comorbidities should be treated
concurrently (KAS 4). It is also
important to consider that a child
with overweight and obesity and
their family require longitudinal and
coordinated care in a medical home
(KAS 9) (see algorithm in Appendix 1).
Measuring BMI and assessing weight
classification (KAS 1) is a screening
step that is applied to a practice
population of children, which allows
the pediatrician and other PHCP’s
to initiate obesity evaluation.
This evaluation is guided by a
comprehensive history, physical
examination, and diagnostic studies,
including those for SDoHs,
disordered eating, and mental and
behavioral health (KAS 2). Overall
guidance for evaluation of
comorbidities is that in children
10 years and older, pediatricians
and other PHCPs should evaluate for
lipid abnormalities, abnormal
glucose metabolism, and abnormal
liver function in children and
adolescents with obesity (BMI $
95th percentile) and for lipid
abnormalities in children and
adolescents with overweight (BMI
85th to <95th percentile).
For younger children or children
who are overweight, the
recommendations are more
conservative. In KAS 3.1, for
children 10 years and older with
overweight (BMI 85th to <95th
percentile), pediatricians and other
PHCPs may evaluate for abnormal
glucose metabolism and liver
function in the presence of risk
factors for T2DM or NAFLD. In
children 2 through 9 years of age
with obesity (BMI $ 95th
percentile), pediatricians and other
PHCPs may evaluate for lipid
abnormalities. In addition to
laboratory evaluation, pediatricians
and other PHCPs should evaluate for
hypertension by measuring blood
pressure at every visit starting at
3 years of age in children and
adolescents with overweight and
obesity (KAS 8). More specific
guidance for further evaluation for
each comorbidity is included in the
Appendices, along with discussion of
other obesity-related comorbidities.
The purpose of the evaluation is to
determine the child’s individual
health status, including the presence
and extent of obesity related
comorbidities, obesity risk factors
present in the child’s history and
environment, and the resources
available to the family to conduct
obesity treatment. Most importantly,
comorbidities must be addressed
concurrently with treatment of
obesity (KAS 4).
MI is a collaborative approach to
conversation about change that is a
core component of delivering of COT,
including engaging patients and
families in addressing overweight
and obesity (KAS 10), setting goals,
and promoting participation in
available resources and programs.
Providing or referring to intensive
IHBLT, as described in KAS 11, is a
foundational aspect of COT.
Pediatricians and other PHCPs
should provide or refer children
6 years and older and may provide
or refer children 2 through 5 years
with overweight and obesity to
IHBLT. IHBLT is more effective with
greater contact hours; the most
effective programs include 26 or
more hours of face-to-face, family-
based, multicomponent treatment
over a 2- to 12-month period. IHBLT
provides ongoing behavioral and
lifestyle support to the child and
family and treatment of obesity-
related comorbidities.
Delivering IHBLT requires being
able to address nutrition and
activity in a holistic manner, using a
family-centered and nonstigmatizing
approach that acknowledges
structural and contextual drivers of
obesity and follows the principles of
the chronic care model and medical
home, in the same manner as other
special health care needs (KAS 9).
IHBLT should be delivered by
primary care providers and their
teams, in collaboration with
pediatric obesity specialists, allied
health providers, and community
partners. If IHBLT is not available,
the pediatrician or other PHCP
should deliver the highest-intensity
HBLT possible. In addition, the
pediatrician or other PHCP serves as
a medical home for the patient,
coordinating care, advocating for the
patient and family, and supporting
transition to adult care.
Concurrent treatment of obesity and
obesity-related comorbidities is
crucial as is the provision of weight
loss pharmacologic treatment and
metabolic and bariatric surgery to
patients according to indications,
risks, and benefits of these
modalities. Weight loss
pharmacotherapy and metabolic
bariatric surgery are evidence-based
obesity treatment modalities that
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
71
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 72]
should be available and offered to
patients when indicated and should
always occur along with IHBLT.
Pediatricians and other PHCPs
should offer adolescents 12 years
and older with obesity weight loss
pharmacotherapy, according to
medication indications, risks, and
benefits, as an adjunct to IHBLT
(KAS 12). Pediatricians and other
PHCPs should offer referral for
adolescents 13 and older with
severe obesity for evaluation for
metabolic and bariatric surgery to
local or regional comprehensive
multidisciplinary pediatric metabolic
and bariatric surgery centers
(KAS 13; see Table 22).
Pediatricians and other PHCPs play a
crucial role in providing COT as
primary treatment providers, in
coordinating care with subspecialists
and in the community, and in
advocating for obesity treatment
resources and elimination of weight
bias and stigma. Because obesity is a
chronic disease with exacerbations and
remissions, children and adolescents
with obesity need appropriate
reassessments of medical and
psychological risks and comorbidities
with appropriate modifications to their
treatment plan. COT also requires
ongoing evaluation and capacity
building of both practice and
community resources that can aid the
family in addressing SDoHs as needed.
Obesity in children and adolescents is
a complex, multifactorial, and treatable
disease. Evidence for successful
treatment, despite stated gaps and
complexities, gives hope to patients
and families that pediatricians and
PHCPs can successfully assess and
address the disease of obesity with an
individualized and compassionate
approach. In contrast to earlier
practices of watchful waiting or
following a staged approach to
intensifying treatment, this CPG
supports early treatment at the
highest level of intensity appropriate
for and available to the child. It is
TABLE 22 Role of the Pediatrician or PCHP
The Continuum of Obesity Care and the Role of PCP or PHCP
Focus
Role of the Pediatrician or PHCP
Diagnosis and measurement
Measure height and weight
Calculate BMI and assess BMI Percentile
Communicate BMI and weight status to patient and family
Risk factors
Assess individual, structural, and contextual risk factors
Evaluation
Perform comprehensive patient history
Conduct physical exam
Evaluate for comorbidities0
Order relevant diagnostic studies and laboratories
Assess readiness to change
Treat comorbidities
Treat obesity and comorbidities concurrently
Treat obesity
Manage children with overweight & obesity following principles of chronic care model and medical home
Deliver nonstigmatizing care
Use MI to engage patient and families in addressing overweight and obesity, set goals and promote participation or utilization of local resources or programs
Promptly engage and refer children to intensive HBL T treatment, if available. If intensive HBL T treatment is not available in your area, deliver highest intensity
HBL T treatment possible.
Foster self-management strategies
Refer to subspecialists if needed
Serve as medical home, coordinate care, advocate for family, and support transition to adult care.
Offer weight loss pharmacotherapy, to eligible patients, according to medication indications, risks, and beneﬁts, as an adjunct to HBL T.
For eligible patients with severe obesity, offer referral to a local or regional comprehensive multidisciplinary pediatric metabolic and bariatric surgery center
for surgical evaluation.
This CPG uses “evaluation” to describe patient assessment, and “test” to describe speciﬁc tests conducted as part of the evaluation.
72
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 73]
hoped that pediatricians and other
PHCPs, health systems, community
partners, payers, and policy makers
will recognize the significance and
urgency outlined by this CPG to
advance the equitable and universal
provision of treatment of the chronic
disease of obesity in children and
adolescents.
SUBCOMMITTEE ON OBESITY
Sarah E. Hampl, MD, FAAP
Sandra G. Hassink, MD, FAAP
Asheley C. Skinner, PhD
Sarah C. Armstrong, MD, FAAP
Sarah E. Barlow, MD, MPH, FAAP
Christopher F. Bolling, MD, FAAP
Kimberly C. Avila Edwards, MD,
FAAP
Ihuoma Eneli, MD, MS, FAAP
Robin Hamre, MPH
Madeline M. Joseph, MD, FAAP
Doug Lunsford, MEd
Eneida Mendonca, MD, PhD, FAAP
Marc P. Michalsky, MD, MBA, FAAP
Nazrat Mirza, MD, ScD, FAAP
Eduardo R. Ochoa, Jr, MD, FAAP
Mona Sharifi, MD, MPH, FAAP
Amanda E. Staiano, PhD, MPP
Ashley E. Weedn, MD, MPH, FAAP
Susan K. Flinn, MA
Jeanne Lindros, MPH
Kymika Okechukwu, MPA
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Pia Daniels, MPH, PMP,
Program Manager, Evidence-Based
Medicine Initiatives and Jeremiah
Salmon, MPH, Manager, Clinical Ini-
tiatives, Institute for Healthy Child-
hood Weight. We also thank Brook
Belay, MD, and Alyson B. Goodman,
CDC liaisons to the writing commit-
tee, for their technical input.
ﬁled conﬂict of interest statements with the American Academy of Pediatrics. Any conﬂicts have been resolved through a process approved by the Board of
Directors. The American Academy of Pediatrics has neither solicited nor accepted any commercial involvement in the development of the content of this
publication.
The guidance in this report does not indicate an exclusive course of treatment or serve as a standard of medical care. Variations, taking into account individual circumstances,
may be appropriate.
All clinical practice guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics automatically expire 5 years after publication unless reafﬁrmed, revised, or retired at or before that
time.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2022-060640
Address correspondence to Sarah Hampl, MD. E-mail: shampl@cmh.edu
PEDIATRICS (ISSN Numbers: Print, 0031-4005; Online, 1098-4275).
Copyright © 2023 by the American Academy of Pediatrics
FUNDING: No external funding.
FINANCIAL/CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES: An Independent review for bias was completed by the American Academy of Pediatrics. Dr Barlow has disclosed a ﬁnancial
relationship with the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development as a co-investigator.
REFERENCES
1. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Prevalence of childhood
obesity in the United States. 2021.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/
obesity/data/childhood.html. Accessed
October 5, 2022
2. Fryar CD, Carroll MD, Afful J. Preva-
lence of overweight, obesity, and
severe obesity among children and
adolescents aged 2–19 years: United
States, 1963– 1965 through 2017–2018.
NCHS E-Health Stats. 2020. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/
obesity-child-17-18/obesity-child.htm.
Accessed October 5, 2022
3. Hales CM, Fryar CD, Carroll MD,
Freedman DS, Ogden CL. Trends in
obesity and severe obesity prevalence in
US youth and adults by sex and age,
2007-2008 to 2015-2016. JAMA.
2018;319(16):1723–1725
4. Ogden CL, Fryar CD, Martin CB, et al.
Trends in obesity prevalence by race
and Hispanic origin-1999-2000 to
2017-2018. JAMA. 2020;324(12):
1208–1210
5. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Prevalence of childhood
obesity in the United States. 2021.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/
obesity/data/childhood.html. Accessed
October 5, 2022
6. National Institutes of Health. Obesity
Research Task Force. Strategic Plan
for NIH Obesity Research. Bethesda,
MD: US Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institutes of
Health; 2011
7. Kyle TK, Dhurandhar EJ, Allison DB.
Regarding obesity as a disease:
evolving policies and their implications.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2016;
45(3):511–520
8. Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention. About social determinants of
health (SDOH). Available at: https://
www.cdc.gov/socialdeterminants/
about.html. Accessed October 5, 2022
9. Medvedyuk S, Ahmednur A, Raphael D.
Ideology, obesity and the social deter-
minants of health: a critical analysis of
the obesity and health relationship.
Crit Public Health. 2018;28(5):573–585
10. Kaiser Permanente Research Affiliates,
Evidence-based Practice Center. Multi-
component Behavioral Interventions
for Weight Management in Children
and Adolescents Who Are Overweight
or With Obesity: A Systematic Evidence
Review for the American Psychological
Association; Portland, OR: Kaiser
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
73
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 74]
Permanente Research Affiliates Evi-
dence-based Practice Center; 2016
11. O’Connor EA, Evans CV, Burda BU, et al.
Screening for Obesity and Interven-
tions for Weight Management in Chil-
dren and Adolescents: A Systematic
Evidence Review for the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality; 2017
12. Barlow SE, Dietz WH. Obesity evaluation
and treatment: expert committee
recommendations. Pediatrics. 1998;
102(3):E29
13. Davis MM, Gance-Cleveland B, Hassink
S, Johnson R, Paradis G, Resnicow K.
Recommendations for prevention of
childhood obesity. Pediatrics. 2007;
120(Suppl 4):S229–S253
14. Krebs NF, Himes JH, Jacobson D,
Nicklas TA, Guilday P, Styne D. Assess-
ment of child and adolescent over-
weight and obesity. Pediatrics.
2007;120(Suppl 4):S193–S228
15. Spear BA, Barlow SE, Ervin C, et al.
Recommendations for treatment of
child and adolescent overweight and
obesity. Pediatrics. 2007;120
(Suppl 4):S254–S288
16. American Academy of Pediatrics,
Institute for Healthy Childhood Weight.
Algorithm for the assessment and
management of childhood obesity in
patients 2 years and older. Available
at: https://downloads.aap.org/AAP/
PDF/algorithm_brightfutures_032819.
pdf?_ga=2.59652141.1052480977.
1664918331-1880284146.1663164182.
Accessed October 5, 2022
17. Timper K, Br€uning JC. Hypothalamic
circuits regulating appetite and
energy homeostasis: pathways to
obesity. Dis Model Mech. 2017;
10(6):679–689
18. Baumer Y, Powell-Wiley TM. Interdisci-
plinary approaches are fundamental
to decode the biology of adversity. Cell.
2021;184(11):2797–2801
19. Gao W, Liu J-L, Lu X, Yang Q. Epigenetic
regulation of energy metabolism in
obesity. J Mol Cell Biol. 2021;
13(7):480–499
20. Browne NT, Hodges EA, Small L, et al.
Childhood obesity within the lens of
racism. Pediatr Obes. 2022;17(5):e12878
21. Pratt CA, Loria CM, Arteaga SS, et al.
A systematic review of obesity
disparities research. Am J Prev Med.
2017;53(1):113–122
22. Trust for America’s Health. State of
obesity 2018: better policies for a
healthier America. Available at: https://
www.tfah.org/report-details/the-state-
of-obesity-2018/. Accessed October 5,
2022
23. Alvarado SE. Neighborhood
disadvantage and obesity across
childhood and adolescence: evidence
from the NLSY children and young
adults cohort (1986-2010). Soc Sci Res.
2016;57:80–98
24. Linton JM, Green A; Council on Commu-
nity Pediatrics. Providing care for chil-
dren in immigrant families. Pediatrics.
2019;144(3):e20192077
25. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Fakhouri TH,
et al. Prevalence of obesity among
youths by household income and edu-
cation level of head of household—
United States, 2011-2014. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018;67(6):186–189
26. Eales L, Reynolds AJ, Ou S-R. Childhood
predictors of adult obesity in the
Chicago Longitudinal Study. Prev Med.
2020;132:105993
27. Ortega Hinojosa AM, MacLeod KE,
Balmes J, Jerrett M. Influence of
school environments on childhood
obesity in California. Environ Res. 2018;
166:100–107
28. Pont SJ, Puhl R, Cook SR, Slusser W;
Section on Obesity; Obesity Society.
Obesity Society. Stigma experienced by
children and adolescents with obesity.
Pediatrics. 2017;140(6):e20173034
29. Kivim€aki M, Vahtera J, Tabak AG,
et al. Neighbourhood socioeconomic
disadvantage, risk factors, and diabetes
from childhood to middle age in the
Young Finns Study: a cohort study. Lan-
cet Public Health. 2018;3(8):
e365–e373
30. Williams DR. Race, socioeconomic
status, and health. The added effects
of racism and discrimination. Ann N Y
Acad Sci. 1999;896:173–188
31. Marmot M. Social determinants of
health inequalities. Lancet. 2005;
365(9464):1099–1104
32. Vargas CM, Stines EM, Granado HS.
Health-equity issues related to child-
hood obesity: a scoping review. J Public
Health Dent. 2017;77(Suppl 1):S32–S42
33. Byrd AS, Toth AT, Stanford FC. Racial
disparities in obesity treatment. Curr
Obes Rep. 2018;7(2):130–138
34. Rossen LM, Talih M. Social determi-
nants of disparities in weight among
US children and adolescents. Ann
Epidemiol. 2014;24(10):705–713.e2
35. Raphael JL, Cooley WC, Vega A, et al.
Outcomes for children with chronic
conditions associated with parent- and
provider-reported measures of the
medical home. J Health Care Poor
Underserved. 2015;26(2):358–376
36. Ward ZJ, Long MW, Resch SC, Giles CM,
Cradock AL, Gortmaker SL. Simulation
of growth trajectories of childhood
obesity into adulthood. N Engl J Med.
2017;377(22):2145–2153
37. Australian Institute of Health and
Welfare. Chronic diseases 2016.
Available at: www.aihw.gov.au/chronic-
diseases/. Accessed September 16,
2020
38. Simmonds M, Llewellyn A, Owen CG,
Woolacott N. Predicting adult obesity
from childhood obesity: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev.
2016;17(2):95–107
39. Jung RT. Obesity as a disease. Br Med
Bull. 1997;53(2):307–321
40. Jastreboff AM, Kotz CM, Kahan S, Kelly
AS, Heymsfield SB. Obesity as a dis-
ease: The Obesity Society 2018 position
statement. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2019;27(1):7–9
41. Dixon B, Pe~na M-M, Taveras EM. Life-
course approach to racial/ethnic dis-
parities in childhood obesity. Adv Nutr.
2012;3(1):73–82
42. Council on Community Pediatrics and
Committee on Native American Child
Health. Policy statement–health equity
and children’s rights. Pediatrics. 2010;
125(4):838–849
43. Puhl R, Suh Y. Health consequences of
weight stigma: implications for obesity
prevention and treatment. Curr Obes
Rep. 2015;4(2):182–190
44. Kirk SFL, Ramos Salas X, Alberga AS,
Russell-Mayhew S. Canadian Adult Obe-
sity Clinical Practice Guidelines:
74
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 75]
Reducing Weight Bias in Obesity Man-
agement, Practice and Policy.
Edmonton, Alberta: Canadian Associa-
tion of Bariatric Physicians and
Surgeons, Obesity Canada;
2020
45. Keating DP, Hertzman C, eds. Develop-
mental Health and the Wealth of Na-
tions: Social, Biological, and
Educational Dynamics. New York, NY:
Guilford Press; 1999
46. Krieger N. A glossary for social epide-
miology. J Epidemiol Community
Health. 2001;55(10):693–700
47. Serdula MK, Ivery D, Coates RJ,
Freedman DS, Williamson DF, Byers T.
Do obese children become obese
adults? A review of the literature. Prev
Med. 1993;22(2):167–177
48. Whitehead M, Dahlgren G. What can be
done about inequalities in health?
Lancet. 1991;338(8774):1059–1063
49. American Academy of Pediatrics,
Committee on Community Pediatrics,
Committee on Native American Child
Health. Policy statemen–health equity
and children’s rights. Pediatrics. 2010;
125(4):838–849
50. Jones CP, Truman BI, Elam-Evans LD,
et al. Using “socially assigned race” to
probe white advantages in health sta-
tus. Ethn Dis. 2008;18(4):496–504
51. Paradies Y, Ben J, Denson N, et al.
Racism as a determinant of health: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.
PLoS One. 2015;10(9):e0138511
52. Trent M, Dooley DG, Douge J; Section
on Adolescent Health; Council on Com-
munity Pediatrics; Committee on
Adolescence. The impact of racism on
child and adolescent health. Pediatrics.
2019;144(2):e20191765
53. Bell CN, Kerr J, Young JL. Associations
between obesity, obesogenic environ-
ments, and structural racism vary by
county-level racial composition. Int J
Environ Res Public Health. 2019;
16(5):861
54. Cozier YCYJ, Yu J, Coogan PF, Bethea
TN, Rosenberg L, Palmer JR. Racism,
segregation, and risk of obesity in the
Black Women’s Health Study. Am J Epi-
demiol. 2014;179(7):875–883
55. Bucchianeri MMEM, Eisenberg ME,
Neumark-Sztainer D. Weightism,
racism, classism, and sexism: shared
forms of harassment in adolescents. J
Adolesc Health. 2013;53(1):
47–53
56. Hunte HER. Association between per-
ceived interpersonal everyday discrimi-
nation and waist circumference over a
9-year period in the Midlife Develop-
ment in the United States cohort study.
Am J Epidemiol. 2011;173(11):
1232–1239
57. Hunte HER. Association between per-
ceived interpersonal everyday discrimi-
nation and waist circumference over a
9-year period in the Midlife Develop-
ment in the United States cohort study.
Am J Epidemiol. 2011;173(11):
1232–1239
58. Lewis TT, Kravitz HM, Janssen I, Powell
LH. Self-reported experiences of dis-
crimination and visceral fat in middle-
aged African-American and Caucasian
women. Am J Epidemiol. 2011;173(11):
1223–1231
59. Molina KM, Estrella ML, Rivera-Olmedo
N, Frisard C, Lemon S, Rosal MC. It
weigh(t)s on you: everyday discrimina-
tion and adiposity among Latinos.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2018;26(9):
1474–1480
60. Gmeiner MS, Warschburger P. Intraper-
sonal predictors of weight bias inter-
nalization among elementary school
children: a prospective analysis. BMC
Pediatr. 2020;20(1):408
61. Palad CJ, Yarlagadda S, Stanford FC.
Weight stigma and its impact on paedi-
atric care. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabe-
tes Obes. 2019;26(1):19–24
62. Rubino F, Puhl RM, Cummings DE, et al.
Joint international consensus state-
ment for ending stigma of obesity. Nat
Med. 2020;26(4):485–497
63. Gundersen C, Mahatmya D, Garasky S,
Lohman B. Linking psychosocial stres-
sors and childhood obesity. Obes Rev.
2011;12(5):e54–e63
64. Slopen N, Goodman E, Koenen KC,
Kubzansky LD. Socioeconomic and
other social stressors and biomarkers
of cardiometabolic risk in youth:
a systematic review of less studied
risk factors. PLoS One. 2013;8(5):
e64418
65. Halfon N, Larson K, Son J, Lu M, Bethell
C. Income inequality and the
differential effect of adverse childhood
experiences in US children. Acad Pe-
diatr. 2017;17(7S):S70–S78
66. Elsenburg LK, van Wijk KJE, Liefbroer
AC, Smidt N. Accumulation of adverse
childhood events and overweight in
children: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2017;25(5):820–832
67. Suglia SF, Koenen KC, Boynton-Jarrett
R, et al; American Heart Association
Council on Epidemiology and Preven-
tion; Council on Cardiovascular
Disease in the Young; Council on Func-
tional Genomics and Translational Biol-
ogy; Council on Cardiovascular and
Stroke Nursing; and Council on Quality
of Care and Outcomes Research. Child-
hood and adolescent adversity and
cardiometabolic outcomes: a scientific
statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation.
2018;137(5):e15–e28
68. Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, et al.
Relationship of childhood abuse and
household dysfunction to many of the
leading causes of death in adults. The
Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE)
Study. Am J Prev Med. 1998;14(4):
245–258
69. Anda RF, Croft JB, Felitti VJ, et al.
Adverse childhood experiences and
smoking during adolescence and adult-
hood. JAMA. 1999;282(17):1652–1658
70. Schuler BR, Vazquez C, Kobulsky JM,
Schroeder K, Tripicchio GL, Wildfeuer
R. The early effects of cumulative and
individual adverse childhood experien-
ces on child diet: examining the role
of socioeconomic status. Prev Med.
2021;145:106447
71. Wiss DA, Brewerton TD. Adverse child-
hood experiences and adult obesity: a
systematic review of plausible mecha-
nisms and meta-analysis of cross-sec-
tional studies. Physiol Behav. 2020;223:
112964
72. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Body mass index (BMI).
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/
healthyweight/assessing/bmi/index.
html. Accessed October 5, 2022
73. Health Resources and Services Admin-
istration. National organizations of
state and local officials: public health
capacity. Available at: https://www.
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
75
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 76]
hrsa.gov/grants/find-funding/hrsa-
20-084. Accessed October 5, 2022
74. McPherson M, Arango P, Fox H, et al. A
new definition of children with special
health care needs. Pediatrics. 1998;
102(1 Pt 1):137–140
75. Health Resources and Services Admin-
istration. Chronic care model. Available
at: https://www.hrsa.gov/behavioral-
health/chronic-care-model. Accessed
October 5, 2022
76. National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion.
About chronic diseases. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/
about/index.htm. Accessed October 5,
2022
77. American Academy of Pediatrics.
COVID-19 interim guidance. Obesity
management and treatment during
COVID-19. Available at: https://services.
aap.org/en/pages/2019-novel-
coronavirus-covid-19-infections/
clinicalguidance/obesity-management-
and-treatment-during-covid-19/.
Accessed October 5, 2022
78. Cuda S, Censani M, O’Hara V, Browne
N, Paisley J. Pediatric Obesity
Algorithm. Centennial, CO: Obesity
Medicine Association; 2020–2022
79. Grossman DC, Bibbins-Domingo K,
Curry SJ, et al; US Preventive Services
Task Force. Screening for obesity in
children and adolescents: US Preven-
tive Services Task Force recommenda-
tion statement. JAMA. 2017;317(23):
2417–2426
80. Skinner AC. Appraisal of clinical care
practices for child obesity prevention
and treatment to inform quality
improvement. Part I: interventions.
Pediatrics. 2023;151(2):e2022060642
81. American Academy of Pediatrics,
National Resource Center for Patient/
Family-Centered Medical Home. What is
a medical home? Available at: https://
medicalhomeinfo.aap.org/overview/
Pages/Whatisthemedicalhome.aspx.
Accessed October 5, 2022
82. National Center on Birth Defects and
Developmental Disabilities. Communi-
cating with and about people with dis-
abilities. Available at: https://www.cdc.
gov/ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/
materials/factsheets/fs-communicating-
withpeople.html. Accessed October 5,
2022
83. Skinner AC, Skelton JA. Prevalence and
trends in obesity and severe obesity
among children in the United States,
1999-2012. JAMA Pediatr. 2014;168(6):
561–566
84. Sokol R, Austin A, Chandler C, et al.
Screening children for social determi-
nants of health: a systematic review.
Pediatrics. 2019;144(4):e20191622
85. US Department of Health and Human
Services, Office of Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion. Healthy people
2030. Available at: https://health.gov/
healthypeople/objectives-and-data/
social-determinants-health. Accessed
October 5, 2022
86. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines
for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Re-
duction in Children and Adolescents;
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Insti-
tute. Expert panel on integrated guide-
lines for cardiovascular health and
risk reduction in children and adoles-
cents: summary report. Pediatrics.
2011;128(Suppl 5):S213–S256
87. Flynn JT, Kaelber DC, Baker-Smith CM,
et al. Clinical practice guideline for
screening and management of high
blood pressure in children and adoles-
cents. Pediatrics. 2017;140(6):
e20173035
88. Vos MB, Abrams SH, Barlow SE, et al.
NASPGHAN clinical practice guideline
for the diagnosis and treatment of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in chil-
dren: recommendations from the Ex-
pert Committee on NAFLD (ECON) and
the North American Society of Pediat-
ric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and
Nutrition (NASPGHAN). J Pediatr Gas-
troenterol Nutr. 2017;64(2):319–334
89. Marcus CL, Brooks LJ, Draper KA, et al;
American Academy of Pediatrics. Diag-
nosis and management of childhood
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
Pediatrics. 2012;130(3):e714–e755
90. American Diabetes Association. 2.
Classification and diagnosis of diabe-
tes: standards of medical care in
diabetes-2021. Diabetes Care. 2021;
44(Suppl 1):S15–S33
91. World Health Organization. WHO Child
Growth Standards: Length/Height-for-
Age, Weight-for-Age, Weight-for-Length,
Weight-for-Height and Body Mass
Index-for-Age: Methods and Develop-
ment. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization; 2006
92. Barlow SE; Expert Committee. Expert
committee recommendations regard-
ing the prevention, assessment, and
treatment of child and adolescent
overweight and obesity: summary
report. Pediatrics. 2007;120(Suppl
4):S164–S192
93. American Academy of Pediatrics.
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guide-
lines Development and Implementation
Manual. Itasca, IL: American Academy
of Pediatrics; 2019
94. Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention. Childhood obesity causes and
consequences. Available at: https://
www.cdc.gov/obesity/childhood/causes.
html. Accessed October 5, 2022
95. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Defining childhood obesity.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/
obesity/childhood/defining.html.
Accessed October 5, 2022
96. Skinner AC, Ravanbakht SN, Skelton JA,
Perrin EM, Armstrong SC. Prevalence
of obesity and severe obesity in US
children, 1999-2016. Pediatrics.
2018;141(3):e20173459
97. Lange SJ, Kompaniyets L, Freedman
DS, et al; DNP3. Longitudinal trends in
body mass index before and during
the COVID-19 pandemic among persons
aged 2-19 years—United States, 2018-
2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2021;70(37):1278–1283
98. Lobstein T, Neveux M, Brown T, et al;
STOP project consortium. Social dis-
parities in obesity treatment for chil-
dren age 3-10 years: a systematic
review. Obes Rev. 2021;22(2):e13153
99. Vazquez CE, Cubbin C. Socioeconomic
status and childhood obesity: a review
of literature from the past decade to
inform intervention research. Curr
Obes Rep. 2020;9(4):562–570
100. Buoncristiano M, Williams J, Simmonds
P, et al. Socioeconomic inequalities in
overweight and obesity among 6- to
9-year-old children in 24 countries from
the World Health Organization European
region. Obes Rev. 2021;22(Suppl 6):
e13213
76
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 77]
101. Rogers R, Eagle TF, Sheetz A, et al. The
relationship between childhood obe-
sity, low socioeconomic status, and
race/ethnicity: lessons from Massa-
chusetts. Child Obes. 2015;11(6):
691–695
102. Maïano C, Hue O, Morin AJ, Moullec G.
Prevalence of overweight and obesity
among children and adolescents with
intellectual disabilities: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev.
2016;17(7):599–611
103. Lynch BA, Agunwamba A, Wilson PM,
et al. Adverse family experiences and
obesity in children and adolescents in
the United States. Prev Med. 2016;90:
148–154
104. Bullock A, Sheff K, Moore K, Manson S.
Obesity and overweight in American
Indian and Alaska Native children,
2006–2015. Am J Public Health.
2017;107(9):1502–1507
105. Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention. Obesity among young children
enrolled in WIC. Available at: https://
www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/obesity-
among-WIC-enrolled-young-children.
html. Accessed October 5, 2022
106. Ghandour RM, Grason HA, Schempf AH,
et al. Healthy people 2010 leading
health indicators: how children with
special health care needs fared. Am J
Public Health. 2013;103(6):e99–e106
107. Rimmer JH, Yamaki K, Lowry BM,
Wang E, Vogel LC. Obesity and obesity-
related secondary conditions in ado-
lescents with intellectual/developmen-
tal disabilities. J Intellect Disabil Res.
2010;54(9):787–794
108. Must A, Curtin C, Hubbard K, Sikich L,
Bedford J, Bandini L. Obesity preven-
tion for children with developmental
disabilities. Curr Obes Rep. 2014;3(2):
156–170
109. Singh AS, Mulder C, Twisk JW, van Me-
chelen W, Chinapaw MJ. Tracking of
childhood overweight into adulthood:
a systematic review of the literature.
Obes Rev. 2008;9(5):474–488
110. Freedman DSLH, Lawman HG, Galuska
DA, Goodman AB, Berenson GS. Track-
ing and variability in childhood levels
of BMI: The Bogalusa Heart Study.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2018;26(7):
1197–1202
111. Li X, Keown-Stoneman CDG, Lebovic G,
et al; TARGet Kids! Collaboration. The
association between body mass index
trajectories and cardiometabolic risk
in young children. Pediatr Obes. 2020;
15(8):e12633
112. Kelly B, West J, Yang TC, Mason D,
Hasan T, Wright J. The association
between body mass index, primary
healthcare use and morbidity in early
childhood: findings from the Born In
Bradford cohort study. Public Health.
2019;167:21–27
113. Umer A, Kelley GA, Cottrell LE, Giacobbi
P Jr, Innes KE, Lilly CL. Childhood obe-
sity and adult cardiovascular disease
risk factors: a systematic review with
meta-analysis. BMC Public Health.
2017;17(1):683
114. Andes LJ, Cheng YJ, Rolka DB, Gregg
EW, Imperatore G. Prevalence of pre-di-
abetes among adolescents and young
adults in the United States, 2005-2016.
JAMA Pediatr. 2020;174(2):e194498
115. Moradi M, Mozaffari H, Askari M,
Azadbakht L. Association between
overweight/obesity with depression,
anxiety, low self-esteem, and body
dissatisfaction in children and
adolescents: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of observational studies.
Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2022;62(2):
555–570
116. Schwartz BS, Glass TA, Pollak J, et al.
Depression, its comorbidities and
treatment, and childhood body mass
index trajectories. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2016;24(12):2585–2592
117. Akhabue E, Perak AM, Chan C,
Greenland P, Allen NB. Racial
differences in rates of change of
childhood body mass index and blood
pressure percentiles. J Pediatr.
2018;202:98–105.e6
118. de Ferranti SD, Gauvreau K, Ludwig
DS, Neufeld EJ, Newburger JW, Rifai N.
Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome
in American adolescents: findings
from the Third National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey.
Circulation. 2004;110(16):2494–2497
119. Martos-Moreno GA, Martınez-Villanueva
J, Gonzalez-Leal R, Chowen JA, Argente
J. Sex, puberty, and ethnicity have a
strong influence on growth and meta-
bolic comorbidities in children and
adolescents with obesity: report on
1300 patients (the Madrid Cohort).
Pediatr Obes. 2019;14(12):e12565
120. Messiah SE, Arheart KL, Luke B,
Lipshultz SE, Miller TL. Relationship
between body mass index and meta-
bolic syndrome risk factors among
US 8- to 14-year-olds, 1999 to 2002.
J Pediatr. 2008;153(2):215–221
121. Kompaniyets L, Lundeen EA, Belay B,
Goodman AB, Tangka F, Blanck HM.
Hospital length of stay, charges, and
costs associated with a diagnosis of
obesity in US children and youth,
2006-2016. Med Care. 2020;58(8):
722–726
122. Finkelstein EA, Graham WC, Malhotra
R. Lifetime direct medical costs of
childhood obesity. Pediatrics. 2014;
133(5):854–862
123. Sherwood NE, Levy RL, Seburg EM,
et al. The Healthy Homes/Healthy Kids
5-10 Obesity Prevention Trial: 12 and
24-month outcomes. Pediatr Obes.
2019;14(8):e12523
124. Sepulveda AR, Solano S, Blanco M,
Lacruz T, Veiga O. Feasibility, accept-
ability, and effectiveness of a multidis-
ciplinary intervention in childhood
obesity from primary care: Nutrition,
physical activity, emotional regulation,
and family. Eur Eat Disord Rev. 2020;
28(2):184–198
125. Kozioł-Kozakowska A, Wojcik M, Furtak
A, Janus D, Starzyk JB. A comparison
of the impact of two methods of nutri-
tion-behavioral intervention on se-
lected auxological and biochemical
parameters in obese prepubertal chil-
dren-crossover preliminary study. Int J
Environ Res Public Health.
2019;16(16):2841
126. Inge TH, Coley RY, Bazzano LA, et al;
PCORnet Bariatric Study Collaborative.
Comparative effectiveness of bariatric
procedures among adolescents: the
PCORnet bariatric study. Surg Obes Re-
lat Dis. 2018;14(9):1374–1386
127. Gulati AK, Kaplan DW, Daniels SR. Clini-
cal tracking of severely obese chil-
dren: a new growth chart. Pediatrics.
2012;130(6):1136–1140
128. Racette SB, Yu L, DuPont NC, Clark BR.
BMI-for-age graphs with severe obesity
percentile curves: tools for plotting
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
77
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 78]
cross-sectional and longitudinal youth
BMI data. BMC Pediatr. 2017;17(1):130
129. Chambers M, Tanamas SK, Clark EJ,
et al. Growth tracking in severely
obese or underweight children.
Pediatrics. 2017;140(6):e20172248
130. Tucker JM, DeFrang R, Orth J,
Wakefield S, Howard K. Evaluation of a
primary care weight management pro-
gram in children aged 2-5 years:
changes in feeding practices, health
behaviors, and body mass index.
Nutrients. 2019;11(3):498
131. Freedman DS, Sherry B. The validity of
BMI as an indicator of body fatness
and risk among children. Pediatrics.
2009;124(Suppl 1):S23–S34
132. Javed A, Jumean M, Murad MH, et al.
Diagnostic performance of body mass
index to identify obesity as defined by
body adiposity in children and adoles-
cents: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Pediatr Obes. 2015;10(3):
234–244
133. Lohman TG. Advances in Body Compo-
sition Assessment. Champaign, IL:
Human Kinetics Publishers; 1992
134. Lazarus R, Baur L, Webb K, Blyth F.
Body mass index in screening for adi-
posity in children and adolescents:
systematic evaluation using receiver
operating characteristic curves. Am J
Clin Nutr. 1996;63(4):500–506
135. Ryder JR, Kaizer AM, Rudser KD, Dan-
iels SR, Kelly AS. Utility of body mass
index in identifying excess adiposity in
youth across the obesity spectrum.
J Pediatr. 2016;177:255–261.e2
136. Wilkes M, Thornton J, Horlick M, et al.
Relationship of BMI z score to fat
percent and fat mass in multiethnic
prepubertal children. Pediatr Obes.
2019;14(1):10.1111/ijpo12463
137. Horlick M, Hediger ML. Measurement
matters. J Pediatr. 2010;156(2):
178–179
138. Dioum A, Gartner A, Maire B, Delpeuch
F, Wade S. Body composition predicted
from skinfolds in African women:
a cross-validation study using
air-displacement plethysmography and
a black-specific equation. Br J Nutr.
2005;93(6):973–979
139. Wells JCK, Fuller NJ, Dewit O, Fewtrell
MS, Elia M, Cole TJ. Four-component
model of body composition in children:
density and hydration of fat-free mass
and comparison with simpler models.
Am J Clin Nutr. 1999;69(5):904–912
140. Weber DR, Moore RH, Leonard MB,
Zemel BS. Fat and lean BMI reference
curves in children and adolescents
and their utility in identifying excess
adiposity compared with BMI and
percentage body fat. Am J Clin Nutr.
2013;98(1):49–56
141. WHO Expert Consultation. Appropriate
body-mass index for Asian populations
and its implications for policy and
intervention strategies. Lancet. 2004;
363(9403):157–163
142. Freedman DS, Wang J, Maynard LM,
et al. Relation of BMI to fat and fat-
free mass among children and adoles-
cents. Int J Obes. 2005;29(1):1–8
143. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, National Center for Health
Statistics. Clinical growth charts.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/
growthcharts/clinical_charts.htm.
Accessed October 5, 2022
144. Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Guo SS,
et al. 2000 CDC growth charts for the
United States: methods and develop-
ment. Vital Health Stat 11. 2002;(246):
1–190
145. Freedman DS, Butte NF, Taveras EM,
Goodman AB, Ogden CL, Blanck HM.
The limitations of transforming very
high body mass indexes into z-scores
among 8.7 million 2- to 4-year-old chil-
dren. J Pediatr. 2017;188:50–56.e1
146. Grummer-Strawn LM, Reinold C, Krebs
NF; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). Use of World Health
Organization and CDC growth charts
for children aged 0-59 months in the
United States. MMWR Recomm Rep.
2010;59(RR-9):1–15
147. World Health Organization. Weight-for-
length/height charts. Available at:
https://www.who.int/tools/child-
growth-standards/standards/weight-
for-length-height. Accessed October 5,
2022
148. Zemel BS, Pipan M, Stallings VA, et al.
Growth charts for children with Down
syndrome in the United States.
Pediatrics. 2015;136(5):e1204–e1211
149. Bailey-Davis L, Kling SMR, Wood GC,
et al. Feasibility of enhancing well-
child visits with family nutrition and
physical activity risk assessment on
body mass index. Obes Sci Pract.
2019;5(3):220–230
150. Fedele DA, Janicke DM, McQuaid EL,
et al. A behavioral family intervention
for children with overweight and
asthma. Clin Pract Pediatr Psychol.
2018;6(3):259–269
151. Forsell C, Gronowitz E, Larsson Y, Kjell-
berg B-M, Friberg P, Mårild S. Four-
year outcome of randomly assigned
lifestyle treatments in primary care of
children with obesity. Acta Paediatr.
2019;108(4):718–724
152. Inge TH, Laffel LM, Jenkins TM, et al;
Teen–Longitudinal Assessment of Bar-
iatric Surgery (Teen-LABS) and Treat-
ment Options of Type 2 Diabetes in
Adolescents and Youth (TODAY) Con-
sortia. Comparison of surgical and
medical therapy for type 2 diabetes in
severely obese adolescents. JAMA
Pediatr. 2018;172(5):452–460
153. Hagan JF, Shaw JS, Duncan PM, eds.
Bright Futures: Guidelines for Health
Supervision of Infants, Children, and
Adolescents, 4th ed. Elk Grove Village,
IL: American Academy of Pediatrics;
2017
154. O’Connor SG, Maher JP, Belcher BR,
et al. Associations of maternal stress
with children’s weight-related behav-
iours: a systematic literature review.
Obes Rev. 2017;18(5):514–525
155. McPherson AC, Hamilton J, Kingsnorth
S, et al. Communicating with children
and families about obesity and weight-
related topics: a scoping review of
best practices. Obes Rev.
2017;18(2):164–182
156. Knierim SD, Rahm AK, Haemer M,
et al. Latino parents’ perceptions of
weight terminology used in pediatric
weight counseling. Acad Pediatr.
2015;15(2):210–217
157. McPherson AC, Knibbe TJ, Oake M,
et al. “Fat is really a four-letter word”:
Exploring weight-related communica-
tion best practices in children with
and without disabilities and their care-
givers. Child Care Health Dev.
2018;44(4):636–643
158. American Medical Association. Person-
first Language For Obesity. Policy H-
78
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 79]
440.821. Chicago, IL: American Medical
Association; 2017
159. Ames H, Mosdøl A, Blaasvær N,
Nøkleby H, Berg RC, Langøien LJ. Com-
munication of children’s weight status:
what is effective and what are the
children’s and parents’ experiences
and preferences? A mixed methods
systematic review. BMC Public Health.
2020;20(1):574
160. Karnik S, Kanekar A. Childhood obesity:
a global public health crisis. Int J Prev
Med. 2012;3(1):1–7
161. McFarland MR, Wehbe-Alamah HB.
Leininger’s theory of culture care
diversity and universality: an overview
with a historical retrospective and a
view toward the future. J Transcult
Nurs. 2019;30(6):540–557
162. Swinburn B, Egger G, Raza F. Dissect-
ing obesogenic environments: the de-
velopment and application of a
framework for identifying and priori-
tizing environmental interventions for
obesity. Prev Med. 1999;29(6 Pt
1):563–570
163. Boyland EJ, Halford JC. Television ad-
vertising and branding. Effects on eat-
ing behaviour and food preferences in
children. Appetite. 2013;62:236–241
164. Boyland EJ, Nolan S, Kelly B, et al. Ad-
vertising as a cue to consume: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of
the effects of acute exposure to un-
healthy food and nonalcoholic bever-
age advertising on intake in children
and adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 2016;
103(2):519–533
165. Jenkin G, Madhvani N, Signal L,
Bowers S. A systematic review of per-
suasive marketing techniques to pro-
mote food to children on television.
Obes Rev. 2014;15(4):281–293
166. Smith R, Kelly B, Yeatman H, Boyland E.
Food marketing influences children’s
attitudes, preferences and consump-
tion: a systematic critical review. Nu-
trients. 2019;11(4):875
167. Villegas-Navas V, Montero-Simo MJ,
Araque-Padilla RA. The effects of foods
embedded in entertainment media on
children’s food choices and food in-
take: a systematic review and meta-
analyses. Nutrients. 2020;12(4):964
168. Sadeghirad B, Duhaney T,
Motaghipisheh S, Campbell NR,
Johnston BC. Influence of unhealthy
food and beverage marketing on
children’s dietary intake and
preference: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized trials.
Obes Rev. 2016;17(10):945–959
169. Strasburger VC; Committee on
Communications, American Academy
of Pediatrics. Children, adolescents,
and advertising. Pediatrics. 2006;
118(6):2563–2569
170. Council on Communications and
Media. Media and young minds.
Pediatrics. 2016;138(5):e20162591
171. Poulsen MN, Glass TA, Pollak J, et al.
Associations of multidimensional
socioeconomic and built environment
factors with body mass index trajecto-
ries among youth in geographically
heterogeneous communities. Prev Med
Rep. 2019;15:100939
172. Jia P, Dai S, Rohli KE, et al. Natural en-
vironment and childhood obesity: a
systematic review. Obes Rev. 2021;
22(Suppl 1):e13097
173. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, Lamb
MM, Flegal KM. Prevalence of high
body mass index in US children and
adolescents, 2007-2008. JAMA. 2010;
303(3):242–249
174. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal
KM. Prevalence of obesity in the United
States, 2009-2010. NCHS Data Brief.
2012;82:1–8
175. Ogden CL, Lamb MM, Carroll MD, Fle-
gal KM. Obesity and socioeconomic
status in children and adolescents:
United States, 2005-2008. NCHS Data
Brief. 2010;51(51):1–8
176. Babey SH, Hastert TA, Wolstein J, Dia-
mant AL. Income disparities in obesity
trends among California adolescents.
Am J Public Health. 2010;100(11):
2149–2155
177. Children’s Defense Fund. The State of
America’s Children. Washington, DC:
Children’s Defense Fund; 2020
178. Lee H, Andrew M, Gebremariam A,
Lumeng JC, Lee JM. Longitudinal asso-
ciations between poverty and obesity
from birth through adolescence. Am J
Public Health. 2014;104(5):e70–e76
179. Li M, Mustillo S, Anderson J. Childhood
poverty dynamics and adulthood over-
weight/obesity: unpacking the black
box of childhood. Soc Sci Res. 2018;
76:92–104
180. Isong IA, Rao SR, Bind M-A, Avenda~no
M, Kawachi I, Richmond TK. Racial and
ethnic disparities in early childhood
obesity. Pediatrics. 2018;141(1):
e20170865
181. Drewnowski A, Specter SE. Poverty
and obesity: the role of energy density
and energy costs. Am J Clin Nutr.
2004;79(1):6–16
182. Harvard University, Center on the
Developing Child. Key concepts.
Toxic stress. Available at: https://
developingchild.harvard.edu/science/
key-concepts/toxic-stress/. Accessed
October 5, 2022
183. Baker EH, Rendall MS, Weden MM.
Epidemiological paradox or immigrant
vulnerability? Obesity among young
children of immigrants. Demography.
2015;52(4):1295–1320
184. Gilbert PA, Khokhar S. Changing die-
tary habits of ethnic groups in Europe
and implications for health. Nutr Rev.
2008;66(4):203–215
185. Gualdi-Russo E, Zaccagni L, Manzon VS,
Masotti S, Rinaldo N, Khyatti M. Obesity
and physical activity in children of im-
migrants. Eur J Public Health. 2014;
24(Suppl 1):40–46
186. Buttenheim AM, Pebley AR, Hsih K,
Chung CY, Goldman N. The shape of
things to come? Obesity prevalence
among foreign-born vs. US-born Mexi-
can youth in California. Soc Sci Med.
2013;78:1–8
187. Gualdi-Russo E, Manzon VS, Masotti S,
et al. Weight status and perception of
body image in children: the effect of
maternal immigrant status. Nutr J.
2012;11:85
188. Flores G, Fuentes-Afflick E, Barbot O,
et al. The health of Latino children: ur-
gent priorities, unanswered questions,
and a research agenda. JAMA. 2002;
288(1):82–90
189. Dubois L, Francis D, Burnier D, et al.
Household food insecurity and child-
hood overweight in Jamaica and
Quebec: a gender-based analysis. BMC
Public Health. 2011;11:199
190. Burke MP, Martini LH, C¸ayõr E,
Hartline-Grafton HL, Meade RL. Severity
of household food insecurity is
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
79
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 80]
positively associated with mental
disorders among children and adoles-
cents in the United States. J Nutr.
2016;146(10):2019–2026
191. Gross RS, Mendelsohn AL, Fierman AH,
Racine AD, Messito MJ. Food insecurity
and obesogenic maternal infant feed-
ing styles and practices in low-income
families. Pediatrics. 2012;130(2):
254–261
192. Coleman-Jensen A, Rabbitt MP, Gregory
CA, Singh A. Household Food Security
in the United States in 2018.
Washington, DC: US Department
of Agriculture, Economic Research
Service; 2019
193. Powell LM, Chaloupka FJ. Food prices
and obesity: evidence and policy impli-
cations for taxes and subsidies.
Milbank Q. 2009;87(1):229–257
194. Sturm R, Datar A. Body mass index in
elementary school children, metropoli-
tan area food prices and food outlet
density. Public Health. 2005;119(12):
1059–1068
195. Sturm R, Datar A. Food prices and
weight gain during elementary school:
5-year update. Public Health. 2008;
122(11):1140–1143
196. Lee J, Kubik MY, Fulkerson JA. Diet
quality and fruit, vegetable, and sugar-
sweetened beverage consumption by
household food insecurity among 8- to
12-year-old children during summer
months. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2019;
119(10):1695–1702
197. Adams EL, Caccavale LJ, Smith D, Bean
MK. Food insecurity, the home food en-
vironment, and parent feeding practi-
ces in the era of COVID-19. Obesity
(Silver Spring). 2020;28(11):2056–2063
198. Kakarala M, Keast DR, Hoerr S. School-
children’s consumption of competitive
foods and beverages, excluding a la
carte. J Sch Health. 2010;80(9):
429–435, quiz 461–463
199. Matsuzaki M, Sanchez BN, Acosta ME,
Botkin J, Sanchez-Vaznaugh EV. Food
environment near schools and body
weight-A systematic review of associa-
tions by race/ethnicity, gender, grade,
and socio-economic factors. Obes Rev.
2020;21(4):e12997
200. Williams J, Scarborough P, Matthews
A, et al. A systematic review of the in-
fluence of the retail food environment
around schools on obesity-related out-
comes. Obes Rev. 2014;15(5):359–374
201. Fiechtner L, Kleinman K, Melly SJ,
et al. Effects of proximity to supermar-
kets on a randomized trial studying in-
terventions for obesity. Am J Public
Health. 2016;106(3):557–562
202. Griffiths C, Frearson A, Taylor A, Radley
D, Cooke C. A cross sectional study in-
vestigating the association between
exposure to food outlets and child-
hood obesity in Leeds, UK. Int J Behav
Nutr Phys Act. 2014;11:138
203. Zhou Q, Zhao L, Zhang L, et al. Neigh-
borhood supermarket access and
childhood obesity: a systematic review.
Obes Rev. 2021;22(Suppl 1):e12937
204. Kim Y, Cubbin C, Oh S. A systematic re-
view of neighbourhood economic con-
text on child obesity and obesity-
related behaviours. Obes Rev.
2019;20(3):420–431
205. Yang S, Zhang X, Feng P, et al. Access
to fruit and vegetable markets and
childhood obesity: a systematic review.
Obes Rev. 2021;22(Suppl 1):e12980
206. Demory-Luce D. Fast food and children
and adolescents: implications for prac-
titioners. Clin Pediatr (Phila).
2005;44(4):279–288
207. Rosenheck R. Fast food consumption
and increased caloric intake: a sys-
tematic review of a trajectory towards
weight gain and obesity risk. Obes
Rev. 2008;9(6):535–547
208. Cobb LK, Appel LJ, Franco M, Jones-
Smith JC, Nur A, Anderson CA. The rela-
tionship of the local food environment
with obesity: a systematic review of
methods, study quality, and results. Obe-
sity (Silver Spring). 2015;23(7):1331–1344
209. Jia P, Luo M, Li Y, Zheng JS, Xiao Q, Luo
J. Fast-food restaurant, unhealthy eat-
ing, and childhood obesity: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Obes
Rev. 2021;22(Suppl 1):e12944
210. Islam MZ, Johnston J, Sly PD. Green
space and early childhood develop-
ment: a systematic review. Rev Environ
Health. 2020;35(2):189–200
211. Malacarne D, Handakas E, Robinson O,
et al. The built environment as deter-
minant of childhood obesity: a system-
atic literature review. Obes Rev.
2022;23(Suppl 1):e13385
212. Lovasi GS, Schwartz-Soicher O, Quinn
JW, et al. Neighborhood safety and
green space as predictors of obesity
among preschool children from low-in-
come families in New York City. Prev
Med. 2013;57(3):189–193
213. Ghassabian A, Vandenberg L, Kannan
K, Trasande L. Endocrine-disrupting
chemicals and child health. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2022;62:573–594
214. Kassotis CD, Vandenberg LN, Demeneix
BA, Porta M, Slama R, Trasande L.
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals:
economic, regulatory, and policy
implications. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2020;8(8):719–730
215. Kahn LG, Philippat C, Nakayama SF,
Slama R, Trasande L. Endocrine-dis-
rupting chemicals: implications for hu-
man health. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2020;8(8):703–718
216. Ebbeling CB, Pawlak DB, Ludwig DS.
Childhood obesity: public-health crisis,
common sense cure. Lancet.
2002;360(9331):473–482
217. Kral TVE, Moore RH, Chittams J, Jones
E, O’Malley L, Fisher JO. Identifying be-
havioral phenotypes for childhood obe-
sity. Appetite. 2018;127:87–96
218. Baumrind D. Effects of authoritative
parental control on child behavior.
Child Dev. 1966;37(4) 887–907
219. Maccoby EE, Martin JA. Socialization in
the Context of the Family: Parent–Child
Interaction. New York, NY: Wiley; 1983
220. Sleddens EF, Gerards SM, Thijs C, de
Vries NK, Kremers SP. General parent-
ing, childhood overweight and obesity-
inducing behaviors: a review. Int J
Pediatr Obes. 2011;6(2-2):e12–e27
221. Sokol RL, Qin B, Poti JM. Parenting styles
and body mass index: a systematic re-
view of prospective studies among chil-
dren. Obes Rev. 2017;18(3):281–292
222. Frankel LA, Hughes SO, O’Connor TM,
Power TG, Fisher JO, Hazen NL. Paren-
tal influences on children’s self-regula-
tion of energy intake: insights from
developmental literature on emotion
regulation. J Obes. 2012;2012:327259
223. Patrick H, Hennessy E, McSpadden K,
Oh A. Parenting styles and practices in
children’s obesogenic behaviors: scien-
tific gaps and future research
80
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 81]
directions. Child Obes. 2013;9(Suppl):
S73–S86
224. Kakinami L, Barnett TA, Seguin L, Para-
dis G. Parenting style and obesity risk
in children. Prev Med. 2015;75:18–22
225. Bates CR, Buscemi J, Nicholson LM,
Cory M, Jagpal A, Bohnert AM. Links
between the organization of the family
home environment and child obesity:
a systematic review. Obes Rev.
2018;19(5):716–727
226. Luger M, Lafontan M, Bes-Rastrollo M,
Winzer E, Yumuk V, Farpour-Lambert N.
Sugar-sweetened beverages and
weight gain in children and adults: a
systematic review from 2013 to 2015
and a comparison with previous stud-
ies. Obes Facts. 2017;10(6):674–693
227. Muth ND, Dietz WH, Magge SN, Johnson
RK; American Academy of Pediatrics;
Section on Obesity; Committee on Nu-
trition; American Heart Association.
Public policies to reduce sugary drink
consumption in children and adoles-
cents. Pediatrics. 2019;143(4):
e20190282
228. Birch LL, Savage JS, Fisher JO. Right
sizing prevention. Food portion size
effects on children’s eating and
weight. Appetite. 2015;88:11–16
229. Costa CS, Del-Ponte B, Assunc¸~ao MCF,
Santos IS. Consumption of ultra-proc-
essed foods and body fat during child-
hood and adolescence: a systematic
review. Public Health Nutr. 2018;
21(1):148–159
230. Lachat C, Nago E, Verstraeten R,
Roberfroid D, Van Camp J, Kolsteren P.
Eating out of home and its association
with dietary intake: a systematic
review of the evidence. Obes Rev.
2012;13(4):329–346
231. Nago ES, Lachat CK, Dossa RA, Kolste-
ren PW. Association of out-of-home eat-
ing with anthropometric changes: a
systematic review of prospective stud-
ies. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2014;54(9):
1103–1116
232. Hammons AJ, Fiese BH. Is frequency of
shared family meals related to the nutri-
tional health of children and adolescents?
Pediatrics. 2011;127(6):e1565–e1574
233. Dallacker M, Hertwig R, Mata J. The
frequency of family meals and
nutritional health in children: a meta-
analysis. Obes Rev. 2018;19(5):638–653
234. Poitras VJ, Gray CE, Janssen X, et al.
Systematic review of the relationships
between sedentary behaviour and
health indicators in the early years
(0–4 years). BMC Public Health. 2017;
17(Suppl 5):868
235. Stiglic N, Viner RM. Effects of screen-
time on the health and well-being of
children and adolescents: a systematic
review of reviews. BMJ Open. 2019;
9(1):e023191
236. Tripathi M, Mishra SK. Screen time
and adiposity among children and
adolescents: a systematic review.
J Public Health (Germany). 2019;
28:227–244
237. Viner RM, Cole TJ. Television viewing in
early childhood predicts adult body
mass index. J Pediatr. 2005;147(4):
429–435
238. Poorolajal J, Sahraei F, Mohamdadi Y,
Doosti-Irani A, Moradi L. Behavioral
factors influencing childhood obesity:
a systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. Obes Res Clin Pract.
2020;14(2):109–118
239. Coombs NA, Stamatakis E. Associations
between objectively assessed and
questionnaire-based sedentary behav-
iour with BMI-defined obesity among
general population children and ado-
lescents living in England. BMJ Open.
2015;5(6):e007172
240. Strasburger VC; Council on Communi-
cations and Media. Children, adoles-
cents, obesity, and the media.
Pediatrics. 2011;128(1):201–208
241. Biddle SJ, Garcıa Bengoechea E,
Wiesner G. Sedentary behaviour and
adiposity in youth: a systematic review
of reviews and analysis of causality.
Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2017;
14(1):43
242. Magee L, Hale L. Longitudinal associa-
tions between sleep duration and sub-
sequent weight gain: a systematic
review. Sleep Med Rev. 2012;16(3):
231–241
243. Reilly JJ, Armstrong J, Dorosty AR,
et al; Avon Longitudinal Study of
Parents and Children Study Team.
Early life risk factors for obesity in
childhood: cohort study. BMJ. 2005;
330(7504):1357
244. Ruan H, Xun P, Cai W, He K, Tang Q. Ha-
bitual sleep duration and risk of child-
hood obesity: systematic review and
dose-response meta-analysis of pro-
spective cohort studies. Sci Rep.
2015;5:16160
245. Nedeltcheva AV, Kilkus JM, Imperial J,
Kasza K, Schoeller DA, Penev PD. Sleep
curtailment is accompanied by in-
creased intake of calories from
snacks. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;89(1):
126–133
246. Weiss A, Xu F, Storfer-Isser A, Thomas
A, Ievers-Landis CE, Redline S. The as-
sociation of sleep duration with ado-
lescents’ fat and carbohydrate
consumption. Sleep. 2010;33(9):
1201–1209
247. Larque E, Labayen I, Flodmark CE,
et al. From conception to infancy -
early risk factors for childhood
obesity. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2019;15(8):
456–478
248. Nadhiroh SR, Djokosujono K, Utari DM.
The association between secondhand
smoke exposure and growth outcomes
of children: a systematic literature
review. Tob Induc Dis. 2020;18:12
249. Tate EB, Wood W, Liao Y, Dunton GF. Do
stressed mothers have heavier chil-
dren? A meta-analysis on the relation-
ship between maternal stress and
child body mass index. Obes Rev.
2015;16(5):351–361
250. Kumar S, Kelly AS. Review of childhood
obesity: from epidemiology, etiology,
and comorbidities to clinical assess-
ment and treatment. Mayo Clin Proc.
2017;92(2):251–265
251. Solmi M, K€ohler CA, Stubbs B, et al.
Environmental risk factors and non-
pharmacological and nonsurgical
interventions for obesity: an umbrella
review of meta-analyses of cohort
studies and randomized controlled
trials. Eur J Clin Invest. 2018;48(12):
e12982
252. Jackson DB, Chilton M, Johnson KR,
Vaughn MG. Adverse childhood experi-
ences and household food insecurity:
findings from the 2016 National Survey
of Children’s Health. Am J Prev Med.
2019;57(5):667–674
253. Harvard University, Center on the
Developing Child. Key concepts.
Toxic stress. Available at: https://
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
81
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 82]
developingchild.harvard.edu/science/
key-concepts/toxic-stress/. Accessed
October 5, 2022
254. Chapman DP, Whitfield CL, Felitti VJ,
Dube SR, Edwards VJ, Anda RF. Ad-
verse childhood experiences and the
risk of depressive disorders in adult-
hood. J Affect Disord. 2004;82(2):
217–225
255. Dube SR, Anda RF, Felitti VJ, Chapman
DP, Williamson DF, Giles WH. Childhood
abuse, household dysfunction, and the
risk of attempted suicide throughout
the life span: findings from the Ad-
verse Childhood Experiences Study.
JAMA. 2001;286(24):3089–3096
256. Isohookana R, Marttunen M, Hakko H,
Riipinen P, Riala K. The impact of ad-
verse childhood experiences on obe-
sity and unhealthy weight control
behaviors among adolescents. Compr
Psychiatry. 2016;71:17–24
257. Schilling EA, Aseltine RH Jr, Gore S. Ad-
verse childhood experiences and men-
tal health in young adults: a
longitudinal survey. BMC Public Health.
2007;7:30
258. Burke NJ, Hellman JL, Scott BG, Weems
CF, Carrion VG. The impact of adverse
childhood experiences on an urban
pediatric population. Child Abuse Negl.
2011;35(6):408–413
259. Benyshek DC. The “early life” origins
of obesity-related health disorders:
new discoveries regarding the inter-
generational transmission of develop-
mentally programmed traits in the
global cardiometabolic health crisis.
Am J Phys Anthropol. 2013;152(Suppl
57):79–93
260. McEwen CA, McEwen BS. Social struc-
ture, adversity, toxic stress, and inter-
generational poverty: an early
childhood model. Annu Rev Sociol.
2017;43:445–472
261. Maes HH, Neale MC, Eaves LJ. Genetic
and environmental factors in relative
body weight and human adiposity.
Behav Genet. 1997;27(4):325–351
262. Stunkard AJ, Foch TT, Hrubec Z. A twin
study of human obesity. JAMA.
1986;256(1):51–54
263. Elks CE, den Hoed M, Zhao JH, et al.
Variability in the heritability of body
mass index: a systematic review and
meta-regression. Front Endocrinol
(Lausanne). 2012;3:29
264. Speliotes EK, Willer CJ, Berndt SI, et al;
MAGIC; Procardis Consortium. Associa-
tion analyses of 249,796 individuals re-
veal 18 new loci associated with body
mass index. Nat Genet.
2010;42(11):937–948
265. Vaisse C, Clement K, Durand E,
Hercberg S, Guy-Grand B, Froguel P.
Melanocortin-4 receptor mutations
are a frequent and heterogeneous
cause of morbid obesity. J Clin Invest.
2000;106(2):253–262
266. Farooqi S, O’Rahilly S. Genetics of obe-
sity in humans. Endocr Rev. 2006;27(7):
710–718
267. Heymsfield SB, Avena NM, Baier L,
et al. Hyperphagia: current concepts
and future directions proceedings of
the 2nd international conference on
hyperphagia. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2014;22(Suppl 1):S1–S17
268. Styne DM, Arslanian SA, Connor EL,
et al. pediatric obesity-assessment,
treatment, and prevention: an Endo-
crine Society clinical practice guide-
line. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;
102(3):709–757
269. Cordero P, Li J, Oben JA. Epigenetics of
obesity: beyond the genome sequence.
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2015;
18(4):361–366
270. van Dijk SJ, Molloy PL, Varinli H,
Morrison JL, Muhlhausler BS; Mem-
bers of EpiSCOPE. Epigenetics and
human obesity. Int J Obes. 2015;39(1):
85–97
271. Bell CG, Walley AJ, Froguel P. The
genetics of human obesity. Nat Rev
Genet. 2005;6(3):221–234
272. Bouret S, Levin BE, Ozanne SE. Gene-
environment interactions control-
ling energy and glucose homeosta-
sis and the developmental origins
of obesity. Physiol Rev.
2015;95(1):47–82
273. Gnawali A. Prematurity and the risk of
development of childhood obesity:
piecing together the pathophysiologi-
cal puzzle. A literature review. Cureus.
2021;13(12):e20518
274. Uthaya S, Thomas EL, Hamilton G, Dore
CJ, Bell J, Modi N. Altered adiposity
after extremely preterm birth. Pediatr
Res. 2005;57(2):211–215
275. Ou-Yang MC, Sun Y, Liebowitz M, et al.
Accelerated weight gain, prematurity,
and the risk of childhood obesity: a
meta-analysis and systematic review.
PLoS One. 2020;15(5):e0232238
276. Whitaker RC, Wright JA, Pepe MS,
Seidel KD, Dietz WH. Predicting obesity
in young adulthood from childhood
and parental obesity. N Engl J Med.
1997;337(13):869–873
277. Lima NMS, Leal VS, Oliveira JS, et al.
Overweight among adolescents and
nutritional status of their parents: a
systematic review. Cien Saude Colet.
2017;22(2):627–636
278. Isganaitis E, Suehiro H, Cardona C.
Who’s your daddy?: paternal inheri-
tance of metabolic disease risk. Curr
Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2017;
24(1):47–55
279. Rasmussen KM, Yaktine AL, eds.
Weight Gain During Pregnancy: Reex-
amining the Guidelines. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press; 2009
280. Lau EY, Liu J, Archer E, McDonald SM,
Liu J. Maternal weight gain in preg-
nancy and risk of obesity among off-
spring: a systematic review. J Obes.
2014;2014:524939
281. Matusiak K, Barrett HL, Callaway LK,
Nitert MD. Periconception weight loss:
common sense for mothers, but what
about for babies? J Obes. 2014;2014:
204295
282. Buckley AJ, Jaquiery AL, Harding JE.
Nutritional programming of adult dis-
ease. Cell Tissue Res. 2005;322(1):73–79
283. Logan KM, Gale C, Hyde MJ,
Santhakumaran S, Modi N. Diabetes in
pregnancy and infant adiposity:
systematic review and meta-analysis.
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed.
2017;102(1):F65–F72
284. Kim SY, Sharma AJ, Callaghan WM.
Gestational diabetes and childhood
obesity: what is the link? Curr Opin
Obstet Gynecol. 2012;24(6):376–381
285. Nehring I, Chmitorz A, Reulen H,
von Kries R, Ensenauer R. Gestational
diabetes predicts the risk of childhood
overweight and abdominal circumfer-
ence independent of maternal obesity.
Diabet Med. 2013;30(12):1449–1456
82
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 83]
286. Lawlor DA, Lichtenstein P, Långstr€om
N. Association of maternal diabetes
mellitus in pregnancy with offspring
adiposity into early adulthood: sibling
study in a prospective cohort of
280866 men from 248 293 families.
Circulation. 2011;123(3):258–265
287. Catalano PM, Hauguel-De Mouzon S. Is
it time to revisit the Pedersen hypothe-
sis in the face of the obesity epidemic?
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2011;204(6):
479–487
288. Gibson KS, Waters TP, Catalano PM.
Maternal weight gain in women who
develop gestational diabetes mellitus.
Obstet Gynecol. 2012;119(3):560–565
289. Heerwagen MJ, Miller MR, Barbour LA,
Friedman JE. Maternal obesity and
fetal metabolic programming: a fertile
epigenetic soil. Am J Physiol Regul
Integr Comp Physiol. 2010;299(3):
R711–R722
290. Dabelea D, Mayer-Davis EJ, Saydah S,
et al; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth
Study. Prevalence of type 1 and type 2
diabetes among children and adoles-
cents from 2001 to 2009. JAMA.
2014;311(17):1778–1786
291. Ge ZJ, Zhang CL, Schatten H, Sun QY.
Maternal diabetes mellitus and the
origin of non-communicable diseases
in offspring: the role of epigenetics.
Biol Reprod. 2014;90(6):139
292. Rayfield S, Plugge E. Systematic review
and meta-analysis of the association
between maternal smoking in preg-
nancy and childhood overweight and
obesity. J Epidemiol Community Health.
2017;71(2):162–173
293. Ino T. Maternal smoking during preg-
nancy and offspring obesity: meta-
analysis. Pediatr Int. 2010;52(1):94–99
294. Oken E, Levitan EB, Gillman MW. Mater-
nal smoking during pregnancy and
child overweight: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Int J Obes. 2008;
32(2):201–210
295. Qureshi R, Jadotte Y, Zha P, et al. The
association between prenatal expo-
sure to environmental tobacco smoke
and childhood obesity: a systematic
review. JBI Database Syst Rev Imple-
ment Reports. 2018;16(8):1643–1662
296. von Kries R, Toschke AM, Koletzko B,
Slikker W Jr. Maternal smoking during
pregnancy and childhood obesity. Am
J Epidemiol. 2002;156(10):954–961
297. Trandafir LM, Temneanu OR. Pre and
post-natal risk and determination of
factors for child obesity. J Med Life.
2016;9(4):386–391
298. Symonds ME, Garnder DS. The Devel-
opmental Environment and the Devel-
opment of Obesity. Cambridge, United
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press;
2006
299. Oken E, Gillman MW. Fetal origins of
obesity. Obes Res. 2003;11(4):496–506
300. Dean SV, Lassi ZS, Imam AM, Bhutta
ZA. Preconception care: nutritional
risks and interventions. Reprod Health.
2014;11(Suppl 3):S3
301. Taveras EM, Scanlon KS, Birch L,
Rifas-Shiman SL, Rich-Edwards JW,
Gillman MW. Association of breast-
feeding with maternal control of
infant feeding at age 1 year.
Pediatrics. 2004;114(5):e577–e583
302. Azad MB, Vehling L, Chan D, et al;
CHILD Study Investigators. Infant feed-
ing and weight gain: separating breast
milk from breastfeeding and formula
from food. Pediatrics. 2018;142(4):
e20181092
303. Appleton J, Russell CG, Laws R, Fowler
C, Campbell K, Denney-Wilson E. Infant
formula feeding practices associated
with rapid weight gain: a systematic
review. Matern Child Nutr. 2018;14(3):
e12602–e12602
304. Pearce J, Langley-Evans SC. The types
of food introduced during complemen-
tary feeding and risk of childhood obe-
sity: a systematic review. Int J Obes.
2013;37(4):477–485
305. Stettler N, Iotova V. Early growth pat-
terns and long-term obesity risk. Curr
Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2010;13(3):
294–299
306. Zheng M, Lamb KE, Grimes C, et al.
Rapid weight gain during infancy and
subsequent adiposity: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of evidence.
Obes Rev. 2018;19(3):321–332
307. Woo Baidal JA, Locks LM, Cheng ER,
Blake-Lamb TL, Perkins ME, Taveras EM.
Risk factors for childhood obesity in the
first 1,000 days: a systematic review.
Am J Prev Med. 2016;50(6):761–779
308. Pearce J, Taylor MA, Langley-Evans SC.
Timing of the introduction of comple-
mentary feeding and risk of childhood
obesity: a systematic review. Int J
Obes. 2013;37(10):1295–1306
309. Cox LM, Blaser MJ. Antibiotics in early
life and obesity. Nat Rev Endocrinol.
2015;11(3):182–190
310. Miller SA, Wu RKS, Oremus M. The
association between antibiotic use in
infancy and childhood overweight or
obesity: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Obes Rev. 2018;19(11):
1463–1475
311. Poulsen MN, Pollak J, Bailey-Davis L,
Hirsch AG, Glass TA, Schwartz BS.
Associations of prenatal and childhood
antibiotic use with child body mass
index at age 3 years. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2017;25(2):438–444
312. Aghaali M, Hashemi-Nazari SS. Associa-
tion between early antibiotic exposure
and risk of childhood weight gain and
obesity: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab.
2019;32(5):439–445
313. Li DK, Chen H, Ferber J, Odouli R. Infec-
tion and antibiotic use in infancy and
risk of childhood obesity: a longitudi-
nal birth cohort study. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2017;5(1):18–25
314. Rasmussen SH, Shrestha S, Bjerregaard
LG, et al. Antibiotic exposure in early
life and childhood overweight and
obesity: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2018;20(6):1508–1514
315. Karam JG, McFarlane SI. Secondary
causes of obesity. Therapy. 2007;4(5):
641–650
316. Bandini L, Danielson M, Esposito LE,
et al. Obesity in children with develop-
mental and/or physical disabilities.
Disabil Health J. 2015;8(3):309–316
317. Institute of Medicine, Committee on
Prevention of Obesity in Children and
Youth. In: Koplan JP, Liverman CT, Kraak
VA, eds. Preventing Childhood Obesity:
Health in the Balance. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press; 2005
318. Cassidy SB, Driscoll DJ. Prader-Willi
syndrome. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009;
17(1):3–13
319. McPheeters ML, Warren Z, Sathe N,
et al. A systematic review of medical
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
83
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 84]
treatments for children with autism
spectrum disorders. Pediatrics. 2011;
127(5):e1312–e1321
320. Tardieu S, Micallef J, Gentile S, Blin O.
Weight gain profiles of new anti-psy-
chotics: public health consequences.
Obes Rev. 2003;4(3):129–138
321. Cermak SA, Curtin C, Bandini LG. Food
selectivity and sensory sensitivity in chil-
dren with autism spectrum disorders.
J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110(2):238–246
322. Puder JJ, Munsch S. Psychological cor-
relates of childhood obesity. Int J Obes
(Lond). 2010;34(Suppl 2):S37–S43
323. Eichstaedt CB, Lavay BW. Physical Activ-
ity for Individuals with Mental Retar-
dation: Infancy through Adulthood.
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics Books;
1992
324. Rimmer JA, Rowland JL. Physical activ-
ity for youth with disabilities: a critical
need in an underserved population.
Dev Neurorehabil. 2008;11(2):141–148
325. Kahathuduwa CN, West BD, Blume J,
Dharavath N, Moustaid-Moussa N,
Mastergeorge A. The risk of over-
weight and obesity in children with
autism spectrum disorders: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Obes
Rev. 2019;20(12):1667–1679
326. Maillard AM, Ruef A, Pizzagalli F, et al;
16p11.2 European Consortium. The
16p11.2 locus modulates brain struc-
tures common to autism, schizophrenia
and obesity. Mol Psychiatry. 2015;20(1):
140–147
327. Shinawi M, Sahoo T, Maranda B, et al.
11p14.1 microdeletions associated
with ADHD, autism, developmental de-
lay, and obesity. Am J Med Genet A.
2011;155A(6):1272–1280
328. Atladottir HO, Henriksen TB, Schendel
DE, Parner ET. Autism after infection,
febrile episodes, and antibiotic use
during pregnancy: an exploratory
study. Pediatrics. 2012;130(6):
e1447–e1454
329. Mueller NT, Whyatt R, Hoepner L, et al.
Prenatal exposure to antibiotics, ce-
sarean section and risk of childhood
obesity. Int J Obes. 2015;39(4):665–670
330. Jung Y, Lee AM, McKee SA, Picciotto
MR. Maternal smoking and autism
spectrum disorder: meta-analysis with
population smoking metrics as moder-
ators. Sci Rep. 2017;7(1):4315
331. Raz R, Levine H, Pinto O, Broday DM,
Yuval Weisskopf MG. Traffic-related air
pollution and autism spectrum disor-
der: a population-based nested case-
control study in Israel. Am J Epidemiol.
2018;187(4):717–725
332. Wan H, Zhang C, Li H, Luan S, Liu C.
Association of maternal diabetes with
autism spectrum disorders in
offspring: a systemic review and
meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore).
2018;97(2):e9438
333. Sanchez CE, Barry C, Sabhlok A, et al.
Maternal pre-pregnancy obesity and
child neurodevelopmental outcomes: a
meta-analysis. Obes Rev.
2018;19(4):464–484
334. Hack M, Taylor HG, Schluchter M,
Andreias L, Drotar D, Klein N. Behav-
ioral outcomes of extremely low birth
weight children at age 8 years. J Dev
Behav Pediatr. 2009;30(2):122–130
335. Lindberg J, Norman M, Westrup B,
€Ohrman T, Domell€of M, Berglund SK.
Overweight, obesity, and body compo-
sition in 3.5- and 7-year-old Swedish
children born with marginally low
birth weight. J Pediatr. 2015;167(6):
1246–52.e3
336. Dominick KC, Davis NO, Lainhart J,
Tager-Flusberg H, Folstein S. Atypical
behaviors in children with autism and
children with a history of language
impairment. Res Dev Disabil.
2007;28(2):145–162
337. Sharp WG, Berry RC, McCracken C,
et al. Feeding problems and nutrient
intake in children with autism spec-
trum disorders: a meta-analysis and
comprehensive review of the litera-
ture. J Autism Dev Disord. 2013;43(9):
2159–2173
338. Fournier KA, Hass CJ, Naik SK, Lodha
N, Cauraugh JH. Motor coordination in
autism spectrum disorders: a synthe-
sis and meta-analysis. J Autism Dev
Disord. 2010;40(10):1227–1240
339. Shetreat-Klein M, Shinnar S, Rapin I.
Abnormalities of joint mobility and
gait in children with autism spectrum
disorders. Brain Dev. 2014;36(2):91–96
340. Rendeli C, Kuczynska E, Giuliano AC,
Chiaretti A, Ausili E. Dietary approach
to prevent obesity risk in Spina Bifida
patients. Childs Nerv Syst. 2020;36(7):
1515–1520
341. Littlewood RA, Trocki O, Shepherd RW,
Shepherd K, Davies PSW. Resting
energy expenditure and body composi-
tion in children with myelomeningo-
cele. Pediatr Rehabil. 2003;6(1):31–37
342. Caminiti C, Saure C, Weglinski J, de
Castro F, Campmany L. Body composi-
tion and energy expenditure in a pop-
ulation of children and adolescents
with myelomeningocele. Arch Argent
Pediatr. 2018;116(1):e8–e13
343. Mueske NM, Ryan DD, Van Speybroeck
AL, Chan LS, Wren TAL. Fat distribution
in children and adolescents with mye-
lomeningocele. Dev Med Child Neurol.
2015;57(3):273–278
344. van den Berg-Emons HJG, Bussmann
JBJ, Meyerink HJ, Roebroeck ME, Stam
HJ. Body fat, fitness and level of every-
day physical activity in adolescents
and young adults with meningomyelo-
cele. J Rehabil Med. 2003;35(6):
271–275
345. Cortese S, Moreira-Maia CR, St Fleur
D, Morcillo-Pe~nalver C, Rohde LA,
Faraone SV. Association between ADHD
and obesity: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 2016;
173(1):34–43
346. Cortese S, Ramos Olazagasti MA, Klein
RG, Castellanos FX, Proal E, Mannuzza
S. Obesity in men with childhood
ADHD: a 33-year controlled, prospec-
tive, follow-up study. Pediatrics. 2013;
131(6):e1731–e1738
347. Khalife N, Kantomaa M, Glover V, et al.
Childhood attention-deficit/hyperactiv-
ity disorder symptoms are risk factors
for obesity and physical inactivity in
adolescence. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2014;53(4):425–436
348. Kooij JJS. ADHD and obesity. Am J Psy-
chiatry. 2016;173(1):1–2
349. Ohkuma T, Hirakawa Y, Nakamura U,
Kiyohara Y, Kitazono T, Ninomiya T. As-
sociation between eating rate and
obesity: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int J Obes. 2015;39(11):
1589–1596
350. Berkowitz RI, Moore RH, Faith MS,
Stallings VA, Kral TV, Stunkard AJ. Iden-
tification of an obese eating style in
4-year-old children born at high and
84
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 85]
low risk for obesity. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2010;18(3):505–512
351. Llewellyn CH, van Jaarsveld CH, Boni-
face D, Carnell S, Wardle J. Eating rate
is a heritable phenotype related to
weight in children. Am J Clin Nutr.
2008;88(6):1560–1566
352. Wood AC, Blissett JM, Brunstrom JM,
et al; American Heart Association
Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometa-
bolic Health; Council on Epidemiology
and Prevention; Council on Lifelong
Congenital Heart Disease and Heart
Health in the Young; Council on Cardio-
vascular and Stroke Nursing; and
Stroke Council. Caregiver influences
on eating behaviors in young children:
a scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. J Am Heart
Assoc. 2020;9(10):e014520
353. Karam JG, McFarlane SI. Prevention
of type 2 diabetes: evidence and
strategies. J Clin Outcomes Manag.
2017;24(4)
354. Eneli IU, Wang W, Kelleher K. Identifica-
tion and counseling for obesity among
children on psychotropic medications
in ambulatory settings. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2013;21(8):1656–1661
355. Bak M, Fransen A, Janssen J, van Os J,
Drukker M. Almost all antipsychotics
result in weight gain: a meta-analysis.
PLoS One. 2014;9(4):e94112
356. Tarricone I, Ferrari Gozzi B, Serretti A,
Grieco D, Berardi D. Weight gain in
antipsychotic-naive patients: a review
and meta-analysis. Psychol Med.
2010;40(2):187–200
357. Pillay J, Boylan K, Carrey N, et al. First-
and Second-Generation Antipsychotics
in Children and Young Adults: System-
atic Review Update. Comparative Effec-
tiveness Reviews, No. 184. Rockville,
MD: Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality; 2017
358. Galling B, Roldan A, Nielsen RE, et al.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus in youth ex-
posed to antipsychotics: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. JAMA
Psychiatry. 2016;73(3):247–259
359. Sweeney B, Kelly AS, San Giovanni CB,
Kelsey MM, Skelton JA. Clinical ap-
proaches to minimize iatrogenic
weight gain in children and adoles-
cents. Clin Obes. 2021;11(1):e12417
360. Quek YH, Tam WWS, Zhang MWB, Ho
RCM. Exploring the association be-
tween childhood and adolescent obe-
sity and depression: a meta-analysis.
Obes Rev. 2017;18(7):742–754
361. Esposito M, Gallai B, Roccella M, et al.
Anxiety and depression levels in pre-
pubertal obese children: a case-con-
trol study. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat.
2014;10:1897–1902
362. Lindberg L, Hagman E, Danielsson P,
Marcus C, Persson M. Anxiety and de-
pression in children and adolescents
with obesity: a nationwide study in
Sweden. BMC Med. 2020;18(1):30
363. Berk M, Williams LJ, Jacka FN, et al.
So depression is an inflammatory dis-
ease, but where does the inflamma-
tion come from? BMC Med. 2013;
11:200
364. Reeves GM, Postolache TT, Snitker S.
Childhood depression: connection be-
tween these growing problems in
growing children. Int J Child Health
Hum Dev. 2008;1(2):103–114
365. Armstrong S, Lazorick S, Hampl S,
et al. Physical examination findings
among children and adolescents
with obesity: an evidence-based re-
view. Pediatrics. 2016;137(2):
e20151766
366. Visscher TLS, Lakerveld J, Olsen N,
et al. Perceived health status: is obe-
sity perceived as a risk factor and dis-
ease? Obes Facts. 2017;10(1):52–60
367. Spurrier NJ, Magarey A, Wong C. Rec-
ognition and management of child-
hood overweight and obesity by
clinicians. J Paediatr Child Health.
2006;42(7-8):411–418
368. Robinson E, Sutin AR. Parental percep-
tion of weight status and weight gain
across childhood. Pediatrics. 2016;
137(5):e20153957
369. He M, Evans A. Are parents aware that
their children are overweight or
obese? Do they care? Can Fam
Physician. 2007;53(9):1493–1499
370. Uy MJA, Pereira MA, Berge JM, Loth
KA. How should we approach and dis-
cuss children’s weight with parents? A
qualitative analysis of recommenda-
tions from parents of preschool-aged
children to physicians. Clin Pediatr
(Phila). 2019;58(2):226–237
371. Neumark-Sztainer D, Story M, Hannan
PJ, Perry CL, Irving LM. Weight-related
concerns and behaviors among over-
weight and nonoverweight adoles-
cents: implications for preventing
weight-related disorders. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med. 2002;156(2):171–178
372. Puhl RM, Peterson JL, Luedicke J. Pa-
rental perceptions of weight terminol-
ogy that providers use with youth.
Pediatrics. 2011;128(4):e786–e793
373. Knierim SD, Newcomer S, Castillo A,
et al. Latino parents’ perceptions of
pediatric weight counseling terms.
Acad Pediatr. 2018;18(3):342–353
374. Valente TW, Fujimoto K, Chou C-P,
Spruijt-Metz D. Adolescent affiliations
and adiposity: a social network analy-
sis of friendships and obesity. J Ado-
lesc Health. 2009;45(2):202–204
375. Eismann EA, Theuerling J, Maguire S,
Hente EA, Shapiro RA. Integration of
the Safe Environment for Every Kid
(SEEK) model across primary care set-
tings. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2019;58(2):
166–176
376. Center for Medicare and Medicaid In-
novation. The accountable health com-
munities health-related social needs
screening tool. Available at: https://
innovation.cms.gov/files/worksheets/
ahcm-screeningtool.pdf. Accessed
October 5, 2022
377. Goddard A. Adverse childhood experi-
ences and trauma-informed care.
J Pediatr Health Care. 2021;35(2):
145–155
378. Forkey H, Szilagyi M, Kelly ET, Duffee J;
Council on Foster Care, Adoption, and
Kinship Care; Council on Community
Pediatrics; Council on Child Abuse and
Neglect; Committee on Psychosocial
Aspects of Child and Family Health.
Trauma-informed care. Pediatrics.
2021;148(2):e2021052580
379. Lobelo F, Muth ND, Hanson S, Nemeth
BA; Council on Sports Medicine and
Fitness; Section on Obesity. Physical
activity assessment and counseling in
pediatric clinical settings. Pediatrics.
2020;145(3):e20193992
380. Rankin J, Matthews L, Cobley S, et al.
Psychological consequences of child-
hood obesity: psychiatric comorbidity
and prevention. Adolesc Health Med
Ther. 2016;7:125–146
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
85
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 86]
381. Jellinek M, Murphy M. Pediatric Symp-
tom Checklist. Boston, MA: Massachu-
setts General Hospital; 1988
382. Johnson JG, Harris ES, Spitzer RL,
Williams JB. The patient health ques-
tionnaire for adolescents: validation of
an instrument for the assessment of
mental disorders among adolescent
primary care patients. J Adolesc
Health. 2002;30(3):196–204
383. Albert Perez E, Mateu Olivares V,
Martınez-Espinosa RM, Molina Vila MD,
Reig Garcıa-Galbis M. New insights
about how to make an intervention in
children and adolescents with meta-
bolic syndrome: diet, exercise vs.
changes in body composition. A sys-
tematic review of RCT. Nutrients.
2018;10(7):878
384. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JBW,
L€owe B. A brief measure for assessing
generalized anxiety disorder: the
GAD-7. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(10):
1092–1097
385. Wolraich ML, Lambert W, Doffing MA,
Bickman L, Simmons T, Worley K. Psy-
chometric properties of the Vanderbilt
ADHD diagnostic parent rating scale in
a referred population. J Pediatr Psy-
chol. 2003;28(8):559–567
386. Wolraich ML, Hagan JFJ Jr, Allan C,
et al; Subcommittee on Children and
Adolescents With Attention-Deficit/Hy-
peractive Disorder. Clinical practice
guideline for the diagnosis, evaluation,
and treatment of attention-deficit/hy-
peractivity disorder in children and
adolescents. Pediatrics. 2019;144(4):
e20192528
387. Golden NH, Schneider M, Wood C; Com-
mittee on Nutrition; Committee on Ado-
lescence; Section on Obesity.
Preventing obesity and eating disor-
ders in adolescents. Pediatrics.
2016;138(3):e20161649
388. Hornberger LL, Lane MA; Committee
on Adolescence. Identification and
management of eating disorders in
children and adolescents. Pediatrics.
2021;147(1):e2020040279
389. Butler MG, Miller JL, Forster JL.
Prader-Willi syndrome—clinical genet-
ics, diagnosis and treatment
approaches: an update. Curr Pediatr
Rev. 2019;15(4):207–244
390. Fernandez CJ, Chacko EC, Pappachan
JM. Male obesity-related secondary
hypogonadism—pathophysiology,
clinical implications and management.
Eur Endocrinol. 2019;15(2):83–90
391. O’Malley GC, Shultz SP, Thivel D, Tsiros
MD. Neuromusculoskeletal health in
pediatric obesity: incorporating evi-
dence into clinical examination. Curr
Obes Rep. 2021;10(4):467–477
392. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational
Interviewing: Helping People Change,
3rd ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press;
2013
393. Baker JL, Olsen LW, Sørensen TI. Child-
hood body-mass index and the risk of
coronary heart disease in adulthood.
N Engl J Med. 2007;357(23):2329–2337
394. Kelly AS, Barlow SE, Rao G, et al;
American Heart Association Athero-
sclerosis; Hypertension, and Obesity in
the Young Committee of the Council
on Cardiovascular Disease in the
Young; Council on Nutrition, Physical
Activity and Metabolism; and Council
on Clinical Cardiology. Severe obesity
in children and adolescents: identifica-
tion, associated health risks, and
treatment approaches: a scientific
statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation.
2013;128(15):1689–1712
395. Skinner AC, Perrin EM, Moss LA,
Skelton JA. Cardiometabolic risks and
severity of obesity in children and
young adults. N Engl J Med.
2015;373(14):1307–1317
396. Skinner AC. Appraisal of clinical care
practices for child obesity prevention
and treatment to inform quality
improvement. Part II: comorbidities.
Pediatrics. 2023;151(2):e2022060643
397. Schwimmer JB, Deutsch R, Kahen T,
Lavine JE, Stanley C, Behling C. Preva-
lence of fatty liver in children and
adolescents. Pediatrics. 2006;118(4):
1388–1393
398. Rehm JL, Connor EL, Wolfgram PM,
Eickhoff JC, Reeder SB, Allen DB. Pre-
dicting hepatic steatosis in a racially
and ethnically diverse cohort of ado-
lescent girls. J Pediatr. 2014;165(2):
319–325.e1
399. Divers J, Mayer-Davis EJ, Lawrence JM,
et al. Trends in incidence of type 1
and type 2 diabetes among youths -
selected counties and Indian reserva-
tions, United States, 2002-2015. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69(6):
161–165
400. Copeland KC, Zeitler P, Geffner M, et al;
TODAY Study Group. Characteristics of
adolescents and youth with recent-on-
set type 2 diabetes: the TODAY cohort
at baseline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2011;96(1):159–167
401. McCarthy MI. Genomics, type 2 diabe-
tes, and obesity. N Engl J Med. 2010;
363(24):2339–2350
402. Commodore-Mensah Y, Matthie N,
Wells J, et al. African Americans,
African immigrants, and Afro-Carib-
beans differ in social determinants of
hypertension and diabetes: evidence
from the National Health Interview
Survey. J Racial Ethn Health
Disparities. 2018;5(5):995–1002
403. Rughani A, Friedman JE, Tryggestad
JB. Type 2 diabetes in youth: the role
of early life exposures. Curr Diab Rep.
2020;20(9):45
404. Duncan DT, Sharifi M, Melly SJ, et al.
Characteristics of walkable built envi-
ronments and BMI z-scores in chil-
dren: evidence from a large electronic
health record database. Environ
Health Perspect. 2014;122(12):
1359–1365
405. Sharifi M, Sequist TD, Rifas-Shiman SL,
et al. The role of neighborhood char-
acteristics and the built environment
in understanding racial/ethnic dispar-
ities in childhood obesity. Prev Med.
2016;91:103–109
406. Gaston SA, Atere-Roberts J, Ward J,
et al. Experiences with everyday and
major forms of racial/ethnic discrimi-
nation and type 2 diabetes risk among
White, Black, and Hispanic/Latina
women: findings from the Sister Study.
Am J Epidemiol. 2021;190(12):
2552–2562
407. Jaffiol C, Thomas F, Spira A, Pannier B,
Danchin N. Prediabetes and depriva-
tion: a couple at high risk of diabetes.
Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique. 2021;
69(6):361–365
408. Butler AM. Social determinants of
health and racial/ethnic disparities in
type 2 diabetes in youth. Curr Diab
Rep. 2017;17(8):60
86
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 87]
409. Kelsey MM, Zeitler PS. Insulin resis-
tance of puberty. Curr Diab Rep.
2016;16(7):64
410. Rajjo T, Almasri J, Al Nofal A, et al. The
association of weight loss and cardio-
metabolic outcomes in obese children:
systematic review and meta-regres-
sion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2017;102(3):758–762
411. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al.
2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA
guideline on the management of blood
cholesterol: executive summary: a re-
port of the American College of Cardi-
ology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73(24):
3168–3209
412. National Institutes of Health, National
Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Expert
Panel on Integrated Guidelines for
Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduc-
tion in Children and Adolescents: Sum-
mary Report. NIH Publication 12-7486A.
Washington, DC: National Heart Lung
and Blood Institute; 2012
413. Juonala M, Magnussen CG, Berenson
GS, et al. Childhood adiposity, adult
adiposity, and cardiovascular risk
factors. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(20):
1876–1885
414. Arslanian S, Bacha F, Grey M, Marcus
MD, White NH, Zeitler P. Evaluation and
management of youth-onset type 2 dia-
betes: a position statement by the
American Diabetes Association. Diabe-
tes Care. 2018;41(12):2648–2668
415. American Diabetes Association. 13.
Children and adolescents: standards
of medical care in diabetes-2019.
Diabetes Care. 2019;42(Suppl 1):
S148–S164
416. American Diabetes Association. 2.0
Classification and diagnosis of diabe-
tes. Diabetes Care. 2017;40(suppl 1):
S11–S24
417. Nguyen D, Kit B, Carroll M. Abnormal
cholesterol among children and ado-
lescents in the United States, 2011-
2014. NCHS Data Brief. 2015;(228):1–8
418. Astudillo M, Tosur M, Castillo B, et al.
Type 2 diabetes in prepubertal chil-
dren. Pediatr Diabetes. 2021;22(7):
946–950
419. Panagiotopoulos C, Hadjiyannakis S,
Henderson M; Diabetes Canada Clinical
Practice Guidelines Expert Committee.
Type 2 diabetes in children and
adolescents. Can J Diabetes. 2018;
42(Suppl 1):S247–S254
420. Pe~na AS, Curran JA, Fuery M, et al.
Screening, assessment and manage-
ment of type 2 diabetes mellitus in
children and adolescents: Australasian
Paediatric Endocrine Group guidelines.
Med J Aust. 2020;213(1):30–43
421. Harlow KE, Africa JA, Wells A, et al;
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical
Research Network (NASH CRN). Clini-
cally actionable hypercholesterolemia
and hypertriglyceridemia in children
with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
J Pediatr. 2018;198:76–83.e2
422. Newton KP, Hou J, Crimmins NA, et al;
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical
Research Network. Prevalence of pre-
diabetes and type 2 diabetes in chil-
dren with nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease. JAMA Pediatr. 2016;170(10):
e161971
423. Andes LJ, Cheng YJ, Rolka DB, Gregg
EW, Imperatore G. Prevalence of predi-
abetes among adolescents and young
adults in the United States, 2005-2016.
JAMA Pediatr. 2020;174(2):e194498
424. Holterman AX, Guzman G, Fantuzzi G,
et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
in severely obese adolescent and adult
patients. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2013;21(3):591–597
425. Bacha F, Gungor N, Lee S, Arslanian
SA. Progressive deterioration of b-cell
function in obese youth with type 2
diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes. 2013;14(2):
106–111
426. Kahn SE, Lachin JM, Zinman B, et al;
ADOPT Study Group. Effects of rosiglita-
zone, glyburide, and metformin on
b-cell function and insulin sensitivity
in ADOPT. Diabetes. 2011;60(5):
1552–1560
427. Sam S, Edelstein SL, Arslanian SA,
et al; RISE Consortium; RISE Consor-
tium Investigators. Baseline predictors
of glycemic worsening in youth and
adults with impaired glucose toler-
ance or recently diagnosed type 2 dia-
betes in the Restoring Insulin
Secretion (RISE) Study. Diabetes Care.
2021;44(9):1938–1947
428. Welsh JA, Karpen S, Vos MB. Increas-
ing prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease among United States
adolescents, 1988-1994 to 2007-2010.
J Pediatr. 2013;162(3):496–500.e1
429. Anderson EL, Howe LD, Jones HE,
Higgins JP, Lawlor DA, Fraser A. The
prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease in children and adolescents: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.
PLoS One. 2015;10(10):e0140908
430. Drobac S, Brickman W, Smith T, Binns
HJ. Evaluation of a type 2 diabetes
screening protocol in an urban pediat-
ric clinic. Pediatrics. 2004;114(1):
141–148
431. Cook S, Weitzman M, Auinger P, Barlow
SE. Screening and counseling associ-
ated with obesity diagnosis in a na-
tional survey of ambulatory pediatric
visits. Pediatrics. 2005;116(1):112–116
432. Eneli IU, Keast DR, Rappley MD,
Camargo CA Jr. Adequacy of two am-
bulatory care surveillance systems for
tracking childhood obesity practice
patterns. Public Health. 2008;122(7):
700–707
433. Xanthakos SA, Lavine JE, Yates KP,
et al; NASH Clinical Research Network.
Progression of fatty liver disease in
children receiving standard of care
lifestyle advice. Gastroenterology.
2020;159(5):1731–1751.e10
434. Vajravelu ME, Lee JM, Shah R, Shults
J, Amaral S, Kelly A. Association be-
tween prediabetes diagnosis and body
mass index trajectory of overweight
and obese adolescents. Pediatr
Diabetes. 2020;21(5):743–746
435. Bolling CF, Armstrong SC, Reichard KW,
Michalsky MP; Section on Obesity; Sec-
tion on Surgery. Metabolic and bariat-
ric surgery for pediatric patients with
severe obesity. Pediatrics. 2019;144(6):
e20193224
436. Derderian SC, Patten L, Kaizer AM,
et al. Influence of weight loss on
obesity-associated complications after
metabolic and bariatric surgery in
adolescents. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2020;28(12):2397–2404
437. de Ferranti SD, Steinberger J, Ameduri
R, et al. Cardiovascular risk reduction
in high-risk pediatric patients: a scien-
tific statement from the American
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
87
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 88]
Heart Association. Circulation.
2019;139(13):e603–e634
438. Ryder JR, Xu P, Inge TH, et al. Thirty-
year risk of cardiovascular disease
events in adolescents with severe obe-
sity. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2020;28(3):
616–623
439. Savoye M, Shaw M, Dziura J, et al. Ef-
fects of a weight management pro-
gram on body composition and
metabolic parameters in overweight
children: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA. 2007;297(24):2697–2704
440. Akinbami LJRL, Rossen LM, Fakhouri
THI, Simon AE, Kit BK. Contribution of
weight status to asthma prevalence
racial disparities, 2-19 year olds, 1988-
2014. Ann Epidemiol. 2017;27(8):
472–478.e3
441. Andersen IG, Holm J-C, Homøe P.
Obstructive sleep apnea in children
and adolescents with and without obe-
sity. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2019;
276(3):871–878
442. Hadjiyannakis S, Ibrahim Q, Li J, et al.
Obesity class versus the Edmonton
Obesity Staging System for Pediatrics
to define health risk in childhood obe-
sity: results from the CANPWR cross-
sectional study. Lancet Child Adolesc
Health. 2019;3(6):398–407
443. Kim SJ, Lee J, Nam CM, Lee SY. Impact
of obesity on metabolic syndrome
among adolescents as compared with
adults in Korea. Yonsei Med J. 2011;
52(5):746–752
444. Reinehr T, Kleber M, Toschke AM. Life-
style intervention in obese children is
associated with a decrease of the met-
abolic syndrome prevalence. Athero-
sclerosis. 2009;207(1):174–180
445. Ciemins EL, Joshi V, Cuddeback JK,
Kushner RF, Horn DB, Garvey WT. Diag-
nosing obesity as a first step to
weight loss: an observational study.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2020;28(12):
2305–2309
446. Banerjee ES, Gambler A, Fogleman C.
Adding obesity to the problem list
increases the rate of providers
addressing obesity. Fam Med. 2013;
45(9):629–633
447. Gopalan A, Lorincz IS, Wirtalla C,
Marcus SC, Long JA. Awareness of pre-
diabetes and engagement in diabetes
risk-reducing behaviors. Am J Prev
Med. 2015;49(4):512–519
448. Murillo R, Katic BJ, Gonzalez T, Vasquez
E, Echeverria S. The association of pre-
diabetes and diabetes risk perception
with leisure-time physical activity and
weight loss. Am J Health Promot.
2019;33(4):534–540
449. Owei I, Umekwe N, Ceesay F, Dagogo-
Jack S. Awareness of prediabetes sta-
tus and subsequent health behavior,
body weight, and blood glucose levels.
J Am Board Fam Med. 2019;32(1):
20–27
450. Doshi N, Perrin EM, Lazorick S, Esser-
man D, Steiner MJ. Short-term change
in body mass index in overweight ado-
lescents following cholesterol screen-
ing. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2009;
163(9):812–817
451. Silva DFO, Sena-Evangelista KCM, Lyra
CO, Pedrosa LFC, Arrais RF, Lima SCVC.
Motivations for weight loss in adoles-
cents with overweight and obesity: a
systematic review. BMC Pediatr.
2018;18(1):364
452. Ayer J, Charakida M, Deanfield JE,
Celermajer DS. Lifetime risk: childhood
obesity and cardiovascular risk. Eur
Heart J. 2015;36(22):1371–1376
453. Friedemann C, Heneghan C, Mahtani K,
Thompson M, Perera R, Ward AM. Car-
diovascular disease risk in healthy
children and its association with body
mass index: systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ. 2012;345:e4759
454. Li L, Perez A, Wu LT, Ranjit N, Brown
HS, Kelder SH. Cardiometabolic risk
factors among severely obese children
and adolescents in the United States,
1999-2012. Child Obes. 2016;12(1):
12–19
455. Kreatsoulas C, Fleegler EW, Kubzansky
LD, McGorrian CM, Subramanian SV.
Young adults and adverse childhood
events: a potent measure of cardiovas-
cular risk. Am J Med. 2019;132(5):
605–613
456. Berglund L, Brunzell JD, Goldberg AC,
et al; Endocrine society. Evaluation and
treatment of hypertriglyceridemia: an
Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2012;97(9):2969–2989
457. McCrindle BW, Tyrrell PN, Kavey R-EW.
Will obesity increase the proportion of
children and adolescents recom-
mended for a statin? Circulation.
2013;128(19):2162–2165
458. Mayer-Davis EJ, Lawrence JM, Dabelea
D, et al; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth
Study. Incidence trends of type 1 and
type 2 diabetes among youths, 2002-
2012. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(15):
1419–1429
459. Klingensmith GJ, Connor CG, Ruedy KJ,
et al; Pediatric Diabetes Consortium.
Presentation of youth with type 2 dia-
betes in the Pediatric Diabetes Consor-
tium. Pediatr Diabetes. 2016;17(4):
266–273
460. Hutchins J, Barajas RA, Hale D,
Escaname E, Lynch J. Type 2 diabetes
in a 5-year-old and single center
experience of type 2 diabetes in youth
under 10. Pediatr Diabetes. 2017;18(7):
674–677
461. Love-Osborne KA, Sheeder JL, Nadeau
KJ, Zeitler P. Longitudinal follow up of
dysglycemia in overweight and obese
pediatric patients. Pediatr Diabetes.
2018;19(2):199–204
462. Hubbard RA, Xu J, Siegel R, Chen Y,
Eneli I. Studying pediatric health out-
comes with electronic health records
using Bayesian clustering and trajec-
tory analysis. J Biomed Inform. 2021;
113:103654
463. Piccolo RS, Pearce N, Araujo AB,
McKinlay JB. The contribution of
biogeographical ancestry and socio-
economic status to racial/ethnic dis-
parities in type 2 diabetes mellitus:
results from the Boston Area Commu-
nity Health Survey. Ann Epidemiol.
2014;24(9):648–654, 654.e1
464. Magge SN, Silverstein J, Elder D,
Nadeau K, Hannon TS. Evaluation and
treatment of prediabetes in youth.
J Pediatr. 2020;219:11–22
465. Zeitler P, Arslanian S, Fu J, et al. ISPAD
Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines
2018: type 2 diabetes mellitus in youth.
Pediatr Diabetes. 2018;19(Suppl
27):28–46
466. Libman IM, Barinas-Mitchell E, Bartucci
A, Robertson R, Arslanian S. Reproduc-
ibility of the oral glucose tolerance
test in overweight children. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab. 2008;93(11):4231–4237
467. Cowie CC, Rust KF, Byrd-Holt DD, et al.
Prevalence of diabetes and high risk
88
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 89]
for diabetes using A1C criteria in the
U.S. population in 1988-2006. Diabetes
Care. 2010;33(3):562–568
468. Peters A, Laffel L; American Diabetes
Association Transitions Working Group.
Diabetes care for emerging adults:
recommendations for transition from
pediatric to adult diabetes care sys-
tems: a position statement of the
American Diabetes Association. Diabe-
tes Care. 2011;34(11):2477–2485
469. Wu EL, Kazzi NG, Lee JM. Cost-effective-
ness of screening strategies for identi-
fying pediatric diabetes mellitus and
dysglycemia. JAMA Pediatr. 2013;
167(1):32–39
470. Peter A, Fritsche A, Stefan N, Heni M,
H€aring HU, Schleicher E. Diagnostic
value of hemoglobin A1c for type 2
diabetes mellitus in a population at
risk. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes.
2011;119(4):234–237
471. Love-Osborne KA, Sheeder J, Svircev A,
Chan C, Zeitler P, Nadeau KJ. Use of
glycosylated hemoglobin increases di-
abetes screening for at-risk adoles-
cents in primary care settings. Pediatr
Diabetes. 2013;14(7):512–518
472. Vijayakumar P, Nelson RG, Hanson RL,
Knowler WC, Sinha M. HbA1c and the
prediction of type 2 diabetes in chil-
dren and adults. Diabetes Care.
2017;40(1):16–21
473. Wallace AS, Wang D, Shin JI, Selvin E.
Screening and diagnosis of prediabe-
tes and diabetes in US children and
adolescents. Pediatrics. 2020;146(3):
e20200265
474. Lee JM, Wu EL, Tarini B, Herman WH,
Yoon E. Diagnosis of diabetes using he-
moglobin A1c: should recommenda-
tions in adults be extrapolated to
adolescents? J Pediatr. 2011;158(6):
947–952.e1-3
475. Herman WH, Ma Y, Uwaifo G, et al; Dia-
betes Prevention Program Research
Group. Differences in A1C by race and
ethnicity among patients with im-
paired glucose tolerance in the Diabe-
tes Prevention Program. Diabetes
Care. 2007;30(10):2453–2457
476. Rao LV, Pratt GW, Bi C, Kroll MH. Large-
scale retrospective analyses of the ef-
fect of iron deficiency anemia on he-
moglobin A1c concentrations. Clin
Chim Acta. 2022;529:21–24
477. Levy-Marchal C, Arslanian S, Cutfield W,
et al; ESPE-LWPES-ISPAD-APPES-APEG-
SLEP-JSPE; Insulin Resistance in Chil-
dren Consensus Conference Group.
Insulin resistance in children: consen-
sus, perspective, and future directions.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95(12):
5189–5198
478. International Expert Committee. Inter-
national Expert Committee report on
the role of the A1C assay in the diag-
nosis of diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2009;32(7):1327–1334
479. Feldstein AE, Charatcharoenwitthaya P,
Treeprasertsuk S, Benson JT, Enders
FB, Angulo P. The natural history of
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in chil-
dren: a follow-up study for up to 20
years. Gut. 2009;58(11):1538–1544
480. Lazo M, Bilal U, Perez-Escamilla R. Epi-
demiology of NAFLD and type 2 diabe-
tes: health disparities among persons
of Hispanic origin. Curr Diab Rep.
2015;15(12):116
481. Schwimmer JB, Newton KP, Awai HI,
et al. Paediatric gastroenterology eval-
uation of overweight and obese chil-
dren referred from primary care for
suspected non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2013;38(10):1267–1277
482. Macumber IR, Weiss NS, Halbach SM,
Hanevold CD, Flynn JT. The association
of pediatric obesity with nocturnal
non-dipping on 24-hour ambulatory
blood pressure monitoring. Am J
Hypertens. 2016;29(5):647–652
483. Chen X, Wang Y. Tracking of blood
pressure from childhood to adulthood:
a systematic review and meta-regres-
sion analysis. Circulation. 2008;
117(25):3171–3180
484. Hao G, Wang X, Treiber FA, Harshfield
G, Kapuku G, Su S. Blood pressure tra-
jectories from childhood to young
adulthood associated with cardiovas-
cular risk: results from the 23-year
Longitudinal Georgia Stress and Heart
Study. Hypertension. 2017;69(3):
435–442
485. Theodore RF, Broadbent J, Nagin D,
et al. Childhood to early-midlife sys-
tolic blood pressure trajectories:
early-life predictors, effect modifiers,
and adult cardiovascular outcomes.
Hypertension. 2015;66(6):1108–1115
486. K€ochli S, Endes K, Steiner R, et al. Obe-
sity, high blood pressure, and physical
activity determine vascular phenotype
in young children. Hypertension. 2019;
73(1):153–161
487. Zhang T, Li S, Bazzano L, He J, Whelton
P, Chen W. Trajectories of childhood
blood pressure and adult left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy: the Bogalusa Heart
Study. Hypertension. 2018;72(1):93–101
488. Hagman E, Danielsson P, Elimam A,
Marcus C. The effect of weight loss
and weight gain on blood pressure in
children and adolescents with obesity.
Int J Obes. 2019;43(10):1988–1994
489. Falkner B, Gidding SS, Portman R,
Rosner B. Blood pressure variability
and classification of prehypertension
and hypertension in adolescence.
Pediatrics. 2008;122(2):238–242
490. Jackson SL, Zhang Z, Wiltz JL, et al. Hy-
pertension among youths—United
States, 2001-2016. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 2018;67(27):758–762
491. Ruiz LD, Zuelch ML, Dimitratos SM,
Scherr RE. Adolescent obesity: diet
quality, psychosocial health, and cardi-
ometabolic risk factors. Nutrients.
2019;12(1):43
492. Au CT, Ho CK, Wing YK, Lam HS, Li AM.
Acute and chronic effects of sleep du-
ration on blood pressure. Pediatrics.
2014;133(1):e64–e72
493. Jiang W, Hu C, Li F, Hua X, Zhang X. As-
sociation between sleep duration and
high blood pressure in adolescents: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ann Hum Biol. 2018;45(6-8):457–462
494. American Academy of Pediatrics. Sec-
tion on Obesity. 5210 Pediatric Obesity
Clinical Decision Support Chart, 3rd
ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2019
495. Hansen ML, Gunn PW, Kaelber DC. Un-
derdiagnosis of hypertension in chil-
dren and adolescents. JAMA. 2007;
298(8):874–879
496. American Academy of Sleep Medicine.
International Classification of Sleep
Disorders, 3rd ed. Darien, IL: American
Academy of Sleep Medicine; 2014
497. El Hayek S, Bitar L, Hamdar LH, Mirza
FG, Daoud G. Poly cystic ovarian syn-
drome: an updated overview. Front
Physiol. 2016;7:124
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
89
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 90]
498. Bremer AA. Polycystic ovary syndrome
in the pediatric population. Metab
Syndr Relat Disord. 2010;8(5):375–394
499. Iba~nez L, Oberfield SE, Witchel S, et al.
An international consortium update:
pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treat-
ment of polycystic ovarian syndrome
in adolescence. Horm Res Paediatr.
2017;88(6):371–395
500. Witchel SF, Oberfield S, Rosenfield RL,
et al. The diagnosis of polycystic
ovary syndrome during adolescence.
Horm Res Paediatr. 2015;83(6):376–389.
DOI: 10.1159/000375530
501. Naz MSG, Tehrani FR, Majd HA, et al.
The prevalence of polycystic ovary syn-
drome in adolescents: a systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Int J Reprod
Biomed (Yazd). 2019;17(8):533–542
502. Legro RS, Arslanian SA, Ehrmann DA,
et al; Endocrine Society. Diagnosis and
treatment of polycystic ovary syn-
drome: an Endocrine Society clinical
practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2013;98(12):4565–4592
503. Estrada E, Eneli I, Hampl S, et al; Child-
ren’s Hospital Association. Children’s
Hospital Association consensus state-
ments for comorbidities of childhood
obesity. Child Obes. 2014;10(4):304–317
504. Sutaria S, Devakumar D, Yasuda SS,
Das S, Saxena S. Is obesity associated
with depression in children? System-
atic review and meta-analysis. Arch
Dis Child. 2019;104(1):64–74
505. Jebeile H, Gow ML, Baur LA, Garnett
SP, Paxton SJ, Lister NB. Association
of pediatric obesity treatment, in-
cluding a dietary component, with
change in depression and anxiety: a
systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. JAMA Pediatr.
2019;173(11):e192841–e192841
506. Zuckerbrot RA, Cheung A, Jensen PS,
Stein REK, Laraque D; GLAD-PC Steering
Group. Guidelines for Adolescent De-
pression in Primary Care (GLAD-PC):
part I. Practice preparation, identifica-
tion, assessment, and initial manage-
ment. Pediatrics. 2018;141(3):
e20174081
507. Lehmann CL, Arons RR, Loder RT, Vitale
MG. The epidemiology of slipped capi-
tal femoral epiphysis: an update. J
Pediatr Orthop. 2006;26(3):286–290
508. Novais EN, Millis MB. Slipped capital
femoral epiphysis: prevalence, patho-
genesis, and natural history. Clin
Orthop Relat Res. 2012;470(12):
3432–3438
509. Castillo C, Mendez M. Slipped capital
femoral epiphysis: a review for pedia-
tricians. Pediatr Ann. 2018;47(9):
e377–e380
510. Janoyer M. Blount disease. Orthop
Traumatol Surg Res. 2019;105(1S):
S111–S121
511. Sabharwal S. Blount disease: an up-
date. Orthop Clin North Am.
2015;46(1):37–47
512. Banwarie RR, Hollman F, Meijs N, et al.
Insight into the possible aetiologies of
Blount’s disease: a systematic review
of the literature. J Pediatr Orthop B.
2020;29(4):323–336
513. Jansen N, Hollman F, Bovendeert F,
Moh P, Stegmann A, Staal HM.
Blount disease and familial
inheritance in Ghana, area cross-
sectional study. BMJ Paediatr Open.
2021;5(1):e001052
514. Markey KA, Mollan SP, Jensen RH,
Sinclair AJ. Understanding idiopathic
intracranial hypertension: mecha-
nisms, management, and future direc-
tions. Lancet Neurol. 2016;15(1):78–91
515. Wall M. Update on idiopathic intracra-
nial hypertension. Neurol Clin. 2017;
35(1):45–57
516. Ko MW, Chang SC, Ridha MA, et al.
Weight gain and recurrence in idio-
pathic intracranial hypertension: a
case-control study. Neurology. 2011;
76(18):1564–1567
517. Kilgore KP, Lee MS, Leavitt JA, et al.
Re-evaluating the incidence of idiopathic
intracranial hypertension in an era of
increasing obesity. Ophthalmology.
2017;124(5):697–700
518. Daniels AB, Liu GT, Volpe NJ, et al. Pro-
files of obesity, weight gain, and qual-
ity of life in idiopathic intracranial
hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri).
Am J Ophthalmol. 2007;143(4):635–641
519. Glueck CJ, Golnik KC, Aregawi D,
Goldenberg N, Sieve L, Wang P.
Changes in weight, papilledema,
headache, visual field, and life sta-
tus in response to diet and metfor-
min in women with idiopathic
intracranial hypertension with and
without concurrent polycystic ovary
syndrome or hyperinsulinemia.
Transl Res. 2006;148(5):215–222
520. Kilic K, Korsbæk JJ, Jensen RH, Cvet-
kovic VV. Diagnosis of idiopathic intra-
cranial hypertension - the importance
of excluding secondary causes: a
systematic review. Cephalalgia. 2022;
42(6):524–541
521. Dietz WH, Belay B, Bradley D, et al. A
Model Framework That Integrates
Community and Clinical Systems for
the Prevention and Management of
Obesity and Other Chronic Diseases.
Washington, DC: National Academy of
Medicine; 2017
522. Medical Home Initiatives for Children
With Special Needs Project Advisory
Committee; American Academy of Pedi-
atrics. The medical home. Pediatrics.
2002;110(1 Pt 1):184–186
523. Cardel MI, Newsome FA, Pearl RL,
et al. Patient-centered care for obesity:
how health care providers can treat
obesity while actively addressing
weight stigma and eating disorder
risk. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2022;122(6):
1089–1098
524. Resnicow K, Davis R, Rollnick S. Moti-
vational interviewing for pediatric obe-
sity: conceptual issues and evidence
review. J Am Diet Assoc. 2006;106(12):
2024–2033
525. Resnicow K, McMaster F, Bocian A,
et al. Motivational interviewing and
dietary counseling for obesity in
primary care: an RCT. Pediatrics. 2015;
135(4):649–657
526. Taylor RW, Cox A, Knight L, et al. A
tailored family-based obesity interven-
tion: a randomized trial. Pediatrics.
2015;136(2):281–289
527. Broccoli S, Davoli AM, Bonvicini L,
et al. Motivational interviewing to treat
overweight children: 24-month follow-
up of a randomized controlled trial.
Pediatrics. 2016;137(1)
528. Gourlan M, Sarrazin P, Trouilloud D.
Motivational interviewing as a way to
promote physical activity in obese
adolescents: a randomised-controlled
trial using self-determination theory
as an explanatory framework. Psychol
Health. 2013;28(11):1265–1286
90
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 91]
529. Taveras EM, Marshall R, Kleinman KP,
et al. Comparative effectiveness of
childhood obesity interventions in pe-
diatric primary care: a cluster-ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr.
2015;169(6):535–542
530. Chen JL, Guedes CM, Cooper BA, Lung
AE. Short-term efficacy of an innova-
tive mobile phone technology-based
intervention for weight management
for overweight and obese adolescents:
pilot study. Interact J Med Res. 2017;
6(2):e12
531. Love-Osborne K, Fortune R, Sheeder J,
Federico S, Haemer MA. School-based
health center-based treatment for
obese adolescents: feasibility and
body mass index effects. Child Obes.
2014;10(5):424–431
532. McCallum Z, Wake M, Gerner B, et al.
Outcome data from the LEAP (Live, Eat
and Play) trial: a randomized con-
trolled trial of a primary care inter-
vention for childhood overweight/mild
obesity. Int J Obes. 2007;31(4):630–636
533. Sherwood NE, JaKa MM, Crain AL,
Martinson BC, Hayes MG, Anderson JD.
Pediatric primary care-based obesity
prevention for parents of preschool
children: a pilot study. Child Obes.
2015;11(6):674–682
534. Taveras EM, Gortmaker SL, Hohman
KH, et al. Randomized controlled trial
to improve primary care to prevent
and manage childhood obesity: the
High Five for Kids study. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med. 2011;165(8):714–722
535. Rifas-Shiman SL, Taveras EM, Gort-
maker SL, et al. Two-year follow-up of
a primary care-based intervention to
prevent and manage childhood obe-
sity: the High Five for Kids study.
Pediatr Obes. 2017;12(3):e24–e27
536. Fonseca H, Prioste A, Sousa P, Gaspar
P, Machado MC. Effectiveness analysis
of an internet-based intervention for
overweight adolescents: next steps for
researchers and clinicians. BMC Obes.
2016;3:15
537. Davoli AM, Broccoli S, Bonvicini L,
et al. Pediatrician-led motivational in-
terviewing to treat overweight chil-
dren: an RCT. Pediatrics. 2013;
132(5):e1236–e1246
538. van Grieken A, Veldhuis L, Renders CM,
et al. Population-based childhood
overweight prevention: outcomes of
the ‘be active, eat right’ study. PLoS
One. 2013;8(5):e65376
539. Small L, Bonds-McClain D, Melnyk B,
Vaughan L, Gannon AM. The prelimi-
nary effects of a primary care-based
randomized treatment trial with over-
weight and obese young children and
their parents. J Pediatr Health Care.
2014;28(3):198–207
540. Stovitz SD, Berge JM, Wetzsteon RJ,
Sherwood NE, Hannan PJ, Himes JH.
Stage 1 treatment of pediatric over-
weight and obesity: a pilot and feasi-
bility randomized controlled trial. Child
Obes. 2014;10(1):50–57
541. Looney SM, Raynor HA. Examining the
effect of three low-intensity pediatric
obesity interventions: a pilot random-
ized controlled trial. Clin Pediatr
(Phila). 2014;53(14):1367–1374
542. Macdonell K, Brogan K, Naar-King S,
Ellis D, Marshall S. A pilot study of
motivational interviewing targeting
weight-related behaviors in overweight
or obese African American
adolescents. J Adolesc Health.
2012;50(2):201–203
543. Walpole B, Dettmer E, Morrongiello BA,
McCrindle BW, Hamilton J. Motivational
interviewing to enhance self-efficacy
and promote weight loss in over-
weight and obese adolescents: a ran-
domized controlled trial. J Pediatr
Psychol. 2013;38(9):944–953
544. Crespo NC, Talavera GA, Campbell NR,
et al. A randomized controlled trial to
prevent obesity among Latino paediat-
ric patients. Pediatr Obes. 2018;13(11):
697–704
545. Moschonis G, Michalopoulou M, Tsout-
soulopoulou K, et al. Assessment of
the effectiveness of a computerised
decision-support tool for health pro-
fessionals for the prevention and
treatment of childhood obesity. Results
from a randomised controlled trial.
Nutrients. 2019;11(3):706
546. Davis AM, James RL, Boles RE, Goetz
JR, Belmont J, Malone B. The use of
TeleMedicine in the treatment of pae-
diatric obesity: feasibility and accept-
ability. Matern Child Nutr. 2011;7(1):
71–79
547. Novotny R, Nigg CR, Li F, Wilkens LR.
Pacific kids DASH for health (PacDASH)
randomized, controlled trial with DASH
eating plan plus physical activity im-
proves fruit and vegetable intake and
diastolic blood pressure in children.
Child Obes. 2015;11(2):177–186
548. Parra-Medina D, Mojica C, Liang Y,
Ouyang Y, Ramos AI, Gomez I. Promot-
ing weight maintenance among over-
weight and obese Hispanic children in
a rural practice. Child Obes. 2015;
11(4):355–363
549. Wake M, Baur LA, Gerner B, et al. Out-
comes and costs of primary care sur-
veillance and intervention for
overweight or obese children: the
LEAP 2 randomised controlled trial.
BMJ. 2009;339:b3308
550. Armstrong S, Mendelsohn A, Bennett
G, Taveras EM, Kimberg A, Kemper AR.
Texting motivational interviewing: a
randomized controlled trial of motiva-
tional interviewing text messages de-
signed to augment childhood obesity
treatment. Child Obes. 2018;14(1):4–10
551. Bean MK, Ingersoll KS, Powell P, et al.
Impact of motivational interviewing on
outcomes of an adolescent obesity
treatment: results from the MI Values
randomized controlled pilot trial. Clin
Obes. 2018;8(5):323–326
552. Akgul Gundogdu N, Sevig EU, Guler N.
The effect of the solution-focused ap-
proach on nutrition-exercise attitudes
and behaviours of overweight and
obese adolescents: randomised con-
trolled trial. J Clin Nurs. 2018;27(7-
8):e1660–e1672
553. Berkowitz RI, Wadden TA, Gehrman CA,
et al. Meal replacements in the treat-
ment of adolescent obesity: a random-
ized controlled trial. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2011;19(6):1193–1199
554. Crabtree VM, Moore JB, Jacks DE,
Cerrito P, Topp RV. A transtheoretical,
case management approach to the
treatment of pediatric obesity. J Prim
Care Community Health. 2010;1(1):4–7
555. DeBar LL, Stevens VJ, Perrin N, et al. A
primary care-based, multicomponent
lifestyle intervention for overweight
adolescent females. Pediatrics.
2012;129(3):e611–e620
556. Ek A, Lewis Chamberlain K, Sorjonen K,
et al. A parent treatment program for
preschoolers with obesity: a
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
91
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 92]
randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics.
2019;144(2):e20183457
557. Fleischman A, Hourigan SE, Lyon HN,
et al. Creating an integrated care
model for childhood obesity: a ran-
domized pilot study utilizing telehealth
in a community primary care setting.
Clin Obes. 2016;6(6):380–388
558. Garipagaoglu M, Sahip Y, Darendeliler
F, Akdikmen O, Kopuz S, Sut N. Family-
based group treatment versus individ-
ual treatment in the management of
childhood obesity: randomized, pro-
spective clinical trial. Eur J Pediatr.
2009;168(9):1091–1099
559. Hofsteenge GH, Chinapaw MJ, Dele-
marre-van de Waal HA, Weijs PJ. Long-
term effect of the Go4it group treat-
ment for obese adolescents: a rando-
mised controlled trial. Clin Nutr.
2014;33(3):385–391
560. Kalavainen MP, Korppi MO, Nuutinen
OM. Clinical efficacy of group-based
treatment for childhood obesity com-
pared with routinely given individual
counseling. Int J Obes. 2007;31(10):
1500–1508
561. Njardvik U, Gunnarsdottir T, Olafsdottir
AS, Craighead LW, Boles RE, Bjarnason
R. Incorporating appetite awareness
training within family-based behavioral
treatment of pediatric obesity: a ran-
domized controlled pilot study. J Pe-
diatr Psychol. 2018;43(9):1017–1027
562. Norman G, Huang J, Davila EP, et al.
Outcomes of a 1-year randomized con-
trolled trial to evaluate a behavioral
‘stepped-down’ weight loss interven-
tion for adolescent patients with obe-
sity. Pediatr Obes. 2016;11(1):18–25
563. Nova A, Russo A, Sala E. Long-term
management of obesity in paediatric
office practice: experimental evalua-
tion of two different types of interven-
tion. Ambul Child Health. 2001;7(3-4):
239–247
564. Parillo M, Licenziati MR, Vacca M, De
Marco D, Iannuzzi A. Metabolic
changes after a hypocaloric, low-glyce-
mic-index diet in obese children. J En-
docrinol Invest. 2012;35(7):629–633
565. Quattrin T, Roemmich JN, Paluch R, Yu
J, Epstein LH, Ecker MA. Treatment out-
comes of overweight children and pa-
rents in the medical home. Pediatrics.
2014;134(2):290–297
566. Quattrin T, Cao Y, Paluch RA, Roemmich
JN, Ecker MA, Epstein LH. Cost-effec-
tiveness of family-based obesity treat-
ment. Pediatrics. 2017;140(3):
e20162755
567. Saelens BE, Sallis JF, Wilfley DE, Patrick
K, Cella JA, Buchta R. Behavioral
weight control for overweight adoles-
cents initiated in primary care. Obes
Res. 2002;10(1):22–32
568. Shelton D, Le Gros K, Norton L, Stan-
ton-Cook S, Morgan J, Masterman P.
Randomised controlled trial: a parent-
based group education programme
for overweight children. J Paediatr
Child Health. 2007;43(12):799–805
569. Stark LJ, Clifford LM, Towner EK, et al.
A pilot randomized controlled trial of
a behavioral family-based intervention
with and without home visits to de-
crease obesity in preschoolers. J Pe-
diatr Psychol. 2014;39(9):1001–1012
570. Stark LJ, Spear Filigno S, Bolling C,
et al. Clinic and home-based behav-
ioral intervention for obesity in
preschoolers: a randomized trial.
J Pediatr. 2018;192:115–121.e1
571. Stettler N, Wrotniak BH, Hill DL, et al.
Prevention of excess weight gain in
paediatric primary care: beverages
only or multiple lifestyle factors. The
Smart Step Study, a cluster-random-
ized clinical trial. Pediatr Obes. 2015;
10(4):267–274
572. Truby H, Baxter K, Ware RS, et al. A
randomized controlled trial of two dif-
ferent macronutrient profiles on
weight, body composition and meta-
bolic parameters in obese adolescents
seeking weight loss. PLoS One.
2016;11(3):e0151787
573. Verbeken S, Braet C, Goossens L, van
der Oord S. Executive function training
with game elements for obese chil-
dren: a novel treatment to enhance
self-regulatory abilities for weight-
control. Behav Res Ther. 2013;51(6):
290–299
574. Ebbeling CB, Leidig MM, Sinclair KB,
Hangen JP, Ludwig DS. A reduced-gly-
cemic load diet in the treatment of ad-
olescent obesity. Arch Pediatr Adolesc
Med. 2003;157(8):773–779
575. Arauz Boudreau AD, Kurowski DS,
Gonzalez WI, Dimond MA, Oreskovic
NM. Latino families, primary care, and
childhood obesity: a randomized
controlled trial. Am J Prev Med.
2013;44(3 Suppl 3):S247–S257
576. Flodmark CE, Ohlsson T, Ryden O,
Sveger T. Prevention of progression to
severe obesity in a group of obese
schoolchildren treated with family
therapy. Pediatrics. 1993;91(5):880–884
577. Martınez-Andrade GO, Cespedes EM,
Rifas-Shiman SL, et al. Feasibility and
impact of Creciendo Sanos, a clinic-
based pilot intervention to prevent
obesity among preschool children in
Mexico City. BMC Pediatr. 2014;14:77
578. Boutelle KN, Norman GJ, Rock CL, Rhee
KE, Crow SJ. Guided self-help for the
treatment of pediatric obesity. Pediat-
rics. 2013;131(5):e1435–e1442
579. Croker H, Viner RM, Nicholls D, et al.
Family-based behavioural treatment of
childhood obesity in a UK National
Health Service setting: randomized
controlled trial. Int J Obes. 2012;36(1):
16–26
580. Deforche B, De Bourdeaudhuij I,
Tanghe A, Debode P, Hills AP, Bouckaert
J. Post-treatment phone contact: a
weight maintenance strategy in obese
youngsters. Int J Obes. 2005;29(5):
543–546
581. Kalavainen M, Korppi M, Nuutinen O.
Long-term efficacy of group-based
treatment for childhood obesity com-
pared with routinely given individual
counselling. Int J Obes. 2011;35(4):
530–533
582. Wright JA, Phillips BD, Watson BL,
Newby PK, Norman GJ, Adams WG.
Randomized trial of a family-based, au-
tomated, conversational obesity treat-
ment program for underserved
populations. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2013;21(9):E369–E378
583. Yackobovitch-Gavan M, Wolf Linhard D,
Nagelberg N, et al. Intervention for
childhood obesity based on parents
only or parents and child compared
with follow-up alone. Pediatr Obes.
2018;13(11):647–655
584. Bohlin A, Hagman E, Klaesson S,
Danielsson P. Childhood obesity
treatment: telephone coaching is as
good as usual care in maintaining
weight loss - a randomized controlled
trial. Clin Obes. 2017;7(4):199–205
92
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 93]
585. Ford AL, Bergh C, S€odersten P, et al.
Treatment of childhood obesity by re-
training eating behaviour: randomised
controlled trial. BMJ. 2009;340:b5388
586. Hills AP, Parker AW. Obesity manage-
ment via diet and exercise interven-
tion. Child Care Health Dev. 1988;14(6):
409–416
587. Hughes AR, Stewart L, Chapple J, et al.
Randomized, controlled trial of a best-
practice individualized behavioral pro-
gram for treatment of childhood over-
weight: Scottish Childhood Overweight
Treatment Trial (SCOTT). Pediatrics.
2008;121(3):e539–e546
588. Pedrosa C, Oliveira BM, Albuquerque I,
Sim~oes-Pereira C, Vaz-de-Almeida MD,
Correia F. Markers of metabolic syn-
drome in obese children before and
after 1-year lifestyle intervention pro-
gram. Eur J Nutr. 2011;50(6):391–400
589. Banks J, Sharp DJ, Hunt LP, Shield JP.
Evaluating the transferability of a hos-
pital-based childhood obesity clinic to
primary care: a randomised controlled
trial. Br J Gen Pract. 2012;62(594):
e6–e12
590. Bathrellou E, Yannakoulia M, Papaniko-
laou K, et al. Parental involvement
does not augment the effectiveness of
an intense behavioral program for the
treatment of childhood obesity. Hor-
mones (Athens). 2010;9(2):171–175
591. Berkowitz RI, Rukstalis MR, Bishop-
Gilyard CT, et al. Treatment of adolescent
obesity comparing self-guided and
group lifestyle modification programs: a
potential model for primary care.
J Pediatr Psychol. 2013;38(9):978–986
592. Casazza K, Cardel M, Dulin-Keita A,
et al. Reduced carbohydrate diet to
improve metabolic outcomes and de-
crease adiposity in obese peripubertal
African American girls. J Pediatr Gas-
troenterol Nutr. 2012;54(3):336–342
593. de Ferranti SD, Milliren CE, Denhoff ER,
et al. Providing food to treat adoles-
cents at risk for cardiovascular dis-
ease. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2015;23(10):2109–2117
594. de Niet J, Timman R, Bauer S, et al.
The effect of a short message service
maintenance treatment on body mass
index and psychological well-being in
overweight and obese children: a
randomized controlled trial. Pediatr
Obes. 2012;7(3):205–219
595. Demol S, Yackobovitch-Gavan M,
Shalitin S, Nagelberg N, Gillon-Keren
M, Phillip M. Low-carbohydrate (low &
high-fat) versus high-carbohydrate
low-fat diets in the treatment of
obesity in adolescents. Acta Paediatr.
2009;98(2):346–351
596. Yackobovitch-Gavan M, Nagelberg N,
Demol S, Phillip M, Shalitin S. Influence
of weight-loss diets with different mac-
ronutrient compositions on health-re-
lated quality of life in obese youth.
Appetite. 2008;51(3):697–703
597. Larsen LM, Hertel NT, Mølgaard C,
Christensen RD, Husby S, Jarbøl DE.
Early intervention for childhood over-
weight: a randomized trial in general
practice. Scand J Prim Health Care.
2015;33(3):184–190
598. Mirza NM, Palmer MG, Sinclair KB,
et al. Effects of a low glycemic load or
a low-fat dietary intervention on body
weight in obese Hispanic American
children and adolescents: a random-
ized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr.
2013;97(2):276–285
599. Partsalaki I, Karvela A, Spiliotis BE.
Metabolic impact of a ketogenic diet
compared to a hypocaloric diet in
obese children and adolescents.
J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2012;
25(7-8):697–704
600. Ba~nos RM, Oliver E, Navarro J, et al.
Efficacy of a cognitive and behavioral
treatment for childhood obesity sup-
ported by the ETIOBE web platform.
Psychol Health Med. 2019;24(6):
703–713
601. Stark LJ, Filigno SS, Kichler JC, et al.
Maintenance following a randomized
trial of a clinic and home-based
behavioral intervention of obesity in
preschoolers. J Pediatr. 2019;213:
128–136.e3
602. Davis AM, Sampilo M, Gallagher KS,
Landrum Y, Malone B. Treating rural
pediatric obesity through telemedicine:
outcomes from a small randomized
controlled trial. J Pediatr Psychol.
2013;38(9):932–943
603. Davis AM, Sampilo M, Gallagher KS,
et al. Treating rural paediatric obesity
through telemedicine vs. telephone:
outcomes from a cluster randomized
controlled trial. J Telemed Telecare.
2016;22(2):86–95
604. O’Connor TM, Hilmers A, Watson K,
Baranowski T, Giardino AP. Feasibility
of an obesity intervention for paediat-
ric primary care targeting parenting
and children: helping HAND. Child Care
Health Dev. 2013;39(1):141–149
605. Wilfley DE, Stein RI, Saelens BE, et al.
Efficacy of maintenance treatment ap-
proaches for childhood overweight: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2007;298(14):1661–1673
606. Wake M, Lycett K, Clifford SA, et al.
Shared care obesity management in
3-10 year old children: 12 month out-
comes of HopSCOTCH randomised trial.
BMJ. 2013;346:f3092
607. Krebs NF, Gao D, Gralla J, Collins JS,
Johnson SL. Efficacy and safety of a
high protein, low carbohydrate diet
for weight loss in severely obese ado-
lescents. J Pediatr. 2010;157(2):
252–258
608. Williams CL, Strobino BA, Brotanek J.
Weight control among obese adoles-
cents: a pilot study. Int J Food Sci
Nutr. 2007;58(3):217–230
609. Kumar S, Croghan IT, Biggs BK, et al.
Family-based mindful eating interven-
tion in adolescents with obesity: a pi-
lot randomized clinical trial. Children
(Basel). 2018;5(7):93
610. Kokkvoll A, Grimsgaard S, Ødegaard R,
Flægstad T, Njølstad I. Single versus
multiple-family intervention in child-
hood overweight–Finnmark Activity
School: a randomised trial. Arch Dis
Child. 2014;99(3):225–231
611. Tjønna AE, Stølen TO, Bye A, et al. Aero-
bic interval training reduces cardio-
vascular risk factors more than a
multitreatment approach in over-
weight adolescents. Clin Sci (Lond).
2009;116(4):317–326
612. Weigel C, Kokocinski K, Lederer P,
D€otsch J, Rascher W, Knerr I. Child-
hood obesity: concept, feasibility, and
interim results of a local group-based,
long-term treatment program. J Nutr
Educ Behav. 2008;40(6):369–373
613. Savoye M, Nowicka P, Shaw M, et al.
Long-term results of an obesity pro-
gram in an ethnically diverse pediatric
population. Pediatrics. 2011;127(3):
402–410
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
93
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 94]
614. Kokkvoll A, Grimsgaard S, Steinsbekk
S, Flægstad T, Njølstad I. Health in
overweight children: 2-year follow-up
of Finnmark Activity School–a
randomised trial. Arch Dis Child. 2015;
100(5):441–448
615. Wilfley DE, Saelens BE, Stein RI, et al.
Dose, content, and mediators of fam-
ily-based treatment for childhood
obesity: a multisite randomized clinical
trial. JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(12):
1151–1159
616. Lison JF, Real-Montes JM, Torro I,
et al. Exercise intervention in child-
hood obesity: a randomized controlled
trial comparing hospital-versus home-
based groups. Acad Pediatr. 2012;
12(4):319–325
617. Vos RC, Huisman SD, Houdijk EC, Pijl H,
Wit JM. The effect of family-based mul-
tidisciplinary cognitive behavioral
treatment on health-related quality of
life in childhood obesity. Qual Life Res.
2012;21(9):1587–1594
618. Bocca G, Corpeleijn E, Stolk RP, Sauer
PJ. Results of a multidisciplinary treat-
ment program in 3-year-old to 5-year-
old overweight or obese children: a
randomized controlled clinical trial.
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2012;
166(12):1109–1115
619. Bocca G, Ongering EC, Stolk RP, Sauer
PJ. Insulin resistance and cardiovascu-
lar risk factors in 3- to 5-year-old over-
weight or obese children. Horm Res
Paediatr. 2013;80(3):201–206
620. Nemet D, Oren S, Pantanowitz M,
Eliakim A. Effects of a multidisciplinary
childhood obesity treatment interven-
tion on adipocytokines, inflammatory
and growth mediators. Horm Res
Paediatr. 2013;79(6):325–332
621. Nemet D, Barkan S, Epstein Y,
Friedland O, Kowen G, Eliakim A. Short-
and long-term beneficial effects of a
combined dietary-behavioral-physical
activity intervention for the treatment
of childhood obesity. Pediatrics. 2005;
115(4):e443–e449
622. van der Baan-Slootweg O, Benninga
MA, Beelen A, et al. Inpatient treatment
of children and adolescents with se-
vere obesity in the Netherlands: a ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr.
2014;168(9):807–814
623. Kirk S, Armstrong S, King E, et al. Es-
tablishment of the Pediatric Obesity
Weight Evaluation Registry: a national
research collaborative for identifying
the optimal assessment and treatment
of pediatric obesity. Child Obes. 2017;
13(1):9–17
624. Skelton JA, Irby MB, Beech BM, Rhodes
SD. Attrition and family participation
in obesity treatment programs: clini-
cians’ perceptions. Acad Pediatr.
2012;12(5):420–428
625. O’Connor EA, Evans CV, Burda BU,
Walsh ES, Eder M, Lozano P. Screening
for obesity and intervention for weight
management in children and adoles-
cents: evidence report and systematic
review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force. JAMA. 2017;317(23):
2427–2444
626. Jasik CB, King EC, Rhodes E, et al.
Characteristics of youth presenting for
weight management: retrospective na-
tional data from the POWER Study
Group. Child Obes. 2015;11(5):630–637
627. Liu S, Weismiller J, Strange K, et al.
Evaluation of the scale-up and imple-
mentation of mind, exercise, nutrition
… do it! (MEND) in British Columbia:
a hybrid trial type 3 evaluation. BMC
Pediatr. 2020;20(1):392
628. Hoffman J, Frerichs L, Story M, et al.
An integrated clinic-community part-
nership for child obesity treatment: a
randomized pilot trial. Pediatrics.
2018;141(1):e20171444
629. Andrews M, Sawyer C, Frerichs L,
et al. Feasibility of a clinic-community
partnership to treat childhood obesity.
Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2018;57(7):
783–791
630. Kong AS, Sussman AL, Yahne C,
Skipper BJ, Burge MR, Davis SM.
School-based health center interven-
tion improves body mass index in
overweight and obese adolescents.
J Obes. 2013;2013:575016
631. Bocca G, Corpeleijn E, van den Heuvel
ER, Stolk RP, Sauer PJ. Three-year
follow-up of 3-year-old to 5-year-old
children after participation in a multi-
disciplinary or a usual-care obesity
treatment program. Clin Nutr. 2014;
33(6):1095–1100
632. Heinberg LJ, Kutchman EM, Berger NA,
et al. Parent involvement is associated
with early success in obesity treatment.
Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2010;49(5):457–465
633. Berge JM, Everts JC. Family-based in-
terventions targeting childhood obe-
sity: a meta-analysis. Child Obes. 2011;
7(2):110–121
634. Bean MK, Caccavale LJ, Adams EL,
et al. Parent involvement in adolescent
obesity treatment: a systematic review.
Pediatrics. 2020;146(3):e20193315
635. Piercy KL, Troiano RP. Physical activity
guidelines for Americans from the US
Department of Health and Human
Services. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Out-
comes. 2018;11(11):e005263
636. van der Horst K, Ferrage A, Rytz A. In-
volving children in meal preparation.
Effects on food intake. Appetite. 2014;
79:18–24
637. Vos RC, Wit JM, Pijl H, Houdijk EC.
Long-term effect of lifestyle interven-
tion on adiposity, metabolic parame-
ters, inflammation and physical
fitness in obese children: a random-
ized controlled trial. Nutr Diabetes.
2011;1(10):e9
638. Stark LJ, Spear S, Boles R, et al.
A pilot randomized controlled trial of
a clinic and home-based behavioral
intervention to decrease obesity in
preschoolers. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2011;19(1):134–141
639. Makkes S, Renders CM, Bosmans JE,
van der Baan-Slootweg OH, Hoekstra T,
Seidell JC. One-year effects of two in-
tensive inpatient treatments for se-
verely obese children and adolescents.
BMC Pediatr. 2016;16:120
640. Quattrin T, Roemmich JN, Paluch R,
Yu J, Epstein LH, Ecker MA. Efficacy of
family-based weight control program
for preschool children in primary
care. Pediatrics. 2012;130(4):660–666
641. Bocca G, Kuitert MW, Sauer PJ, Stolk
RP, Flapper BC, Corpeleijn E. A multi-
disciplinary intervention programme
has positive effects on quality of life in
overweight and obese preschool chil-
dren. Acta Paediatr. 2014;103(9):
962–967
642. Butte NF, Hoelscher DM, Barlow SE,
et al. Efficacy of a community- versus
primary care-centered program for
childhood obesity: TX CORD RCT.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2017;25(9):
1584–1593
94
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 95]
643. Reinehr T, Schaefer A, Winkel K, Finne
E, Toschke AM, Kolip P. An effective life-
style intervention in overweight chil-
dren: findings from a randomized
controlled trial on “Obeldicks light”.
Clin Nutr. 2010;29(3):331–336
644. Skelton JA, Beech BM. Attrition in pae-
diatric weight management: a review
of the literature and new directions.
Obes Rev. 2011;12(5):e273–e281
645. Butte NF, Watson KB, Ridley K, et al. A
youth compendium of physical activi-
ties: activity codes and metabolic in-
tensities. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2018;50(2):246–256
646. Anderson YC, Wynter LE, Grant CC,
et al. A novel home-based intervention
for child and adolescent obesity: the
results of the Whanau Pakari random-
ized controlled trial. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2017;25(11):1965–1973
647. Jebeile H, Lister NB, Baur LA, Garnett
SP, Paxton SJ. Eating disorder risk in
adolescents with obesity. Obes Rev.
2021;22(5):e13173
648. Rhodes ET, Boles RE, Chin K, et al. Ex-
pectations for treatment in pediatric
weight management and relationship
to attrition. Child Obes. 2017;13(2):
120–127
649. Kumar S, King EC, Christison AL, et al;
POWER Work Group. Health outcomes
of youth in clinical pediatric weight
management programs in POWER. J
Pediatr. 2019;208:57–65.e4
650. Lycett K, Juonala M, Magnussen CG,
et al. Body mass index from early to
late childhood and cardiometabolic
measurements at 11 to 12 years. Pedi-
atrics. 2020;146(2):e20193666
651. Haemer M, Cluett S, Hassink SG, et al.
Building capacity for childhood obesity
prevention and treatment in the medi-
cal community: call to action. Pediat-
rics. 2011;128(Suppl 2):S71–S77
652. Long KA, Weinert C. Rural nursing: de-
veloping the theory base. Sch Inq Nurs
Pract. 1989;3(2):113–127
653. Tolbert J. The Coverage Provisions in
the Affordable Care Act: An Update.
San Francisco, CA: Kaiser Family Foun-
dation; 2015
654. Armstrong SC, Bolling CF, Michalsky
MP, Reichard KW; Section on Obesity;
Section on Surgery. Pediatric
metabolic and bariatric surgery: evi-
dence, barriers, and best practices.
Pediatrics. 2019;144(6):e20193223
655. Children’s Hospital Association. 2013
Survey Findings on Children’s Hospi-
tals Obesity Services. Overland Park,
KS: Children’s Hospital Association;
2014
656. Azevedo LB, Ling J, Soos I, Robalino S,
Ells L. The effectiveness of sedentary
behaviour interventions for reducing
body mass index in children and ado-
lescents: systematic review and meta-
analysis. Obes Rev. 2016;17(7):623–635
657. Fanburg JT, Rogers VW, Dedekian MA;
National Initiative for Children’s Health-
care Quality; The Barbara Bush Child-
ren’s Hospital; American Academy of
Pediatrics Maine Chapter. Next Steps
Activity Book! Activity Book for
Caregivers and Children Aged 5 to
12 Years. Elk Grove Village, IL:
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2016
658. Fanburg JT, Rogers VW, Dedekian MA;
National Initiative for Children’s Health-
care Quality; The Barbara Bush Child-
ren’s Hospital; American Academy of
Pediatrics Maine Chapter. Pasos
Proximos <Libro de Actividades! Libro
de Actividades para Cuidadores y
Ni~nos de Entre 5 y 12 A~nos. Elk Grove
Village, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2016
659. Malik VS, Pan A, Willett WC, Hu FB.
Sugar-sweetened beverages
and weight gain in children and
adults: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr.
2013;98(4):1084–1102
660. Vos MB, Kaar JL, Welsh JA, et al;
American Heart Association Nutrition
Committee of the Council on Lifestyle
and Cardiometabolic Health; Council
on Clinical Cardiology; Council on
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young;
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke
Nursing; Council on Epidemiology and
Prevention; Council on Functional
Genomics and Translational Biology;
and Council on Hypertension. Added
sugars and cardiovascular disease
risk in children: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2017;135(19):e1017–e1034
661. Committee on Nutrition and the Coun-
cil on Sports Medicine and Fitness.
Sports drinks and energy drinks for
children and adolescents: are they
appropriate? Pediatrics. 2011;127(6):
1182–1189
662. Heyman MB, Abrams SA; Section on
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nu-
trition; Committee on Nutrition. Fruit
juice in infants, children, and adoles-
cents: current recommendations.
Pediatrics. 2017;139(6):e20170967
663. Thivel D, Masurier J, Baquet G, et al.
High-intensity interval training in over-
weight and obese children and adoles-
cents: systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Sports Med Phys Fitness.
2019;59(2):310–324
664. Garcıa-Hermoso A, Sanchez-Lopez M,
Martınez-Vizcaıno V. Effects of aerobic
plus resistance exercise on body
composition related variables in
pediatric obesity: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Pediatr Exerc Sci.
2015;27(4):431–440
665. Kelley GA, Kelley KS. Effects of exercise
in the treatment of overweight and
obese children and adolescents: a
systematic review of meta-analyses.
J Obes. 2013;2013:783103
666. Ruotsalainen H, Kyng€as H, Tammelin T,
K€a€ari€ainen M. Systematic review of
physical activity and exercise interven-
tions on body mass indices, subse-
quent physical activity and
psychological symptoms in overweight
and obese adolescents. J Adv Nurs.
2015;71(11):2461–2477
667. Marson EC, Delevatti RS, Prado AKG,
Netto N, Kruel LFM. Effects of aerobic,
resistance, and combined exercise
training on insulin resistance markers
in overweight or obese children and
adolescents: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Prev Med.
2016;93:211–218
668. Monzani A, Ricotti R, Caputo M, et al. A
systematic review of the association
of skipping breakfast with weight and
cardiometabolic risk factors in chil-
dren and adolescents. What should we
better investigate in the future?
Nutrients. 2019;11(2):387
669. Tucker SJ, Ytterberg KL, Lenoch LM,
et al. Reducing pediatric overweight:
nurse-delivered motivational interview-
ing in primary care. J Pediatr Nurs.
2013;28(6):536–547
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
95
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 96]
670. Gortmaker SL, Polacsek M, Letourneau
L, et al. Evaluation of a primary care
intervention on body mass index: the
Maine Youth Overweight Collaborative.
Child Obes. 2015;11(2):187–193
671. Khalsa AS, Kharofa R, Ollberding NJ,
Bishop L, Copeland KA. Attainment of
‘5-2-1-0’ obesity recommendations in
preschool-aged children. Prev Med
Rep. 2017;8:79–87
672. LeBlanc AG, Chaput JP, McFarlane A,
et al. Active video games and health
indicators in children and youth: a
systematic review. PLoS One. 2013;
8(6):e65351
673. Madsen KA, Thompson HR, Wlasiuk
L, Queliza E, Schmidt C, Newman TB.
After-school program to reduce
obesity in minority children: a pilot
study. J Child Health Care.
2009;13(4):333–346
674. Oliveira CB, Pinto RZ, Saraiva BTC,
et al. Effects of active video games on
children and adolescents: a systematic
review with meta-analysis. Scand J
Med Sci Sports. 2020;30(1):4–12
675. Staiano AE, Abraham AA, Calvert SL.
Adolescent exergame play for weight
loss and psychosocial improvement: a
controlled physical activity interven-
tion. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013;
21(3):598–601
676. Staiano AE, Webster EK, Allen AT,
Jarrell AR, Martin CK. Screen-time
policies and practices in early care
and education centers in relationship
to child physical activity. Child Obes.
2018;14(6):341–348
677. Trost SG, O’Neil M. Clinical use of ob-
jective measures of physical activity.
Br J Sports Med. 2014;48(3):178–181
678. Lu AS, Kharrazi H, Gharghabi F,
Thompson D. A systematic review of
health videogames on childhood
obesity prevention and intervention.
Games Health J. 2013;2(3):131–141
679. Maddison R, Foley L, Ni Mhurchu C,
et al. Effects of active video games on
body composition: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;
94(1):156–163
680. Staiano AE, Marker AM, Beyl RA, Hsia
DS, Katzmarzyk PT, Newton RL. A ran-
domized controlled trial of dance exer-
gaming for exercise training in
overweight and obese adolescent
girls. Pediatr Obes. 2017;12(2):120–128
681. Staiano AE, Beyl RA, Guan W, Hendrick
CA, Hsia DS, Newton RL Jr. Home-based
exergaming among children with over-
weight and obesity: a randomized clin-
ical trial. Pediatr Obes. 2018;13(11):
724–733
682. Trost SG, Sundal D, Foster GD, Lent
MR, Vojta D. Effects of a pediatric
weight management program with
and without active video games a ran-
domized trial. JAMA Pediatr. 2014;
168(5):407–413
683. Staiano AE. Exergames, energy expen-
diture, and obesity. In: van den Bulck
J, ed. The International Encyclopedia
of Media Psychology. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons; 2020
684. American Psychological Association.
Clinical Practice Guideline Panel. Clini-
cal Practice Guideline for Multicompo-
nent Behavioral Treatment of Obesity
and Overweight in Children and Ado-
lescents: Current State of the Evidence
and Research Needs. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association;
2018
685. Rosenkranz RR, Bauer A, Dzewaltowski
DA. Mother-daughter resemblance in
BMI and obesity-related behaviors. Int
J Adolesc Med Health. 2010;22(4):
477–489
686. van der Kruk JJ, Kortekaas F, Lucas C,
Jager-Wittenaar H. Obesity: a system-
atic review on parental involvement in
long-term European childhood weight
control interventions with a nutritional
focus. Obes Rev. 2013;14(9):745–760
687. Van Ryzin MJ, Nowicka P. Direct and in-
direct effects of a family-based inter-
vention in early adolescence on
parent-youth relationship quality, late
adolescent health, and early adult obe-
sity. J Fam Psychol. 2013;27(1):106–116
688. Enright G, Allman-Farinelli M, Redfern
J. Effectiveness of family-based behav-
ior change interventions on obesity-re-
lated behavior change in children: a
realist synthesis. Int J Environ Res
Public Health. 2020;17(11):4099
689. Modi AC, Pai AL, Hommel KA, et al.
Pediatric self-management: a frame-
work for research, practice, and policy.
Pediatrics. 2012;129(2):e473–e485
690. Ruggiero L, Glasgow R, Dryfoos JM,
et al. Diabetes self-management. Self-
reported recommendations and pat-
terns in a large population. Diabetes
Care. 1997;20(4):568–576
691. Richard AA, Shea K. Delineation of self-
care and associated concepts. J Nurs
Scholarsh. 2011;43(3):255–264
692. Welch JL, Johnson M, Zimmerman L,
Russell CL, Perkins SM, Decker BS.
Self-management interventions in
stages 1 to 4 chronic kidney disease:
an integrative review. West J Nurs
Res. 2015;37(5):652–678
693. Ory MG, Ahn S, Jiang L, et al. National
study of chronic disease self-manage-
ment: six-month outcome findings. J
Aging Health. 2013;25(7):1258–1274
694. Havas K, Douglas C, Bonner A. Meeting
patients where they are: improving
outcomes in early chronic kidney dis-
ease with tailored self-management
support (the CKD-SMS study). BMC
Nephrol. 2018;19(1):279
695. Pugh P, Hemingway P, Christian M,
Higginbottom G. Children’s, parents’,
and other stakeholders’ perspectives
on the factors influencing the
initiation of early dietary change in
the management of childhood chronic
disease: a mixed studies systematic
review using a narrative synthesis.
Patient Educ Couns. 2021;104(4):844–857
696. Jabs J, Devine CM. Time scarcity and
food choices: an overview. Appetite.
2006;47(2):196–204
697. Curtin C, Hyman SL, Boas DD, et al.
Weight management in primary care
for children with autism: expert rec-
ommendations. Pediatrics.
2020;145(Suppl 1):S126–S139
698. Zablotsky B, Black LI, Maenner MJ,
et al. Prevalence and trends of devel-
opmental disabilities among children
in the United States: 2009-2017. Pediat-
rics. 2019;144(4):e20190811
699. Feehan K, O’Neil ME, Abdalla D, et al.
Factors influencing physical activity in
children and youth with special health
care needs: a pilot study. Int J Pediatr.
2012;2012:583249
700. Abeysekara P, Turchi R, O’Neil M.
Obesity and children with special
healthcare needs: special considera-
tions for a special population. Curr
Opin Pediatr. 2014;26(4):508–515
96
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 97]
701. Ptomey LT, Washburn RA, Goetz JR,
et al. Weight loss interventions for
adolescents with intellectual disabil-
ities: an RCT. Pediatrics. 2021;148(3):
e2021050261
702. Ptomey LT, Wittenbrook W. Position of
the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics:
nutrition services for individuals with
intellectual and developmental disabil-
ities and special health care needs. J
Acad Nutr Diet. 2015;115(4):593–608
703. Haney K, Messiah SE, Arheart KL, et al.
Park-based afterschool program to im-
prove cardiovascular health and physi-
cal fitness in children with disabilities.
Disabil Health J. 2014;7(3):335–342
704. Carbone PS, Smith PJ, Lewis C, LeBlanc
C. Promoting the participation of chil-
dren and adolescents with disabilities
in sports, recreation, and physical ac-
tivity. Pediatrics. 2021;148(6):
e2021054664
705. CanChild. Research in practice: F
words knowledge hub. Available at:
https://www.canchild.ca/en/research-
in-practice/f-words-in-childhood-
disability. Accessed October 5, 2022
706. Duis J, van Wattum PJ, Scheimann A,
et al. A multidisciplinary approach to
the clinical management of Prader-
Willi syndrome. Mol Genet Genomic
Med. 2019;7(3):e514
707. McCandless SE; Committee on Genet-
ics. Clinical report—health supervi-
sion for children with Prader-Willi
syndrome. Pediatrics. 2011;127(1):
195–204
708. Haliloglu B, Bereket A. Hypothalamic
obesity in children: pathophysiology to
clinical management. J Pediatr Endo-
crinol Metab. 2015;28(5-6):503–513
709. Cortese S, Vincenzi B. Obesity and
ADHD: clinical and neurobiological im-
plications. Curr Top Behav Neurosci.
2012;9:199–218
710. Kelly AS, Auerbach P, Barrientos-Perez
M, et al; NN8022-4180 Trial Investiga-
tors. A randomized, controlled trial of
liraglutide for adolescents with obe-
sity. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(22):
2117–2128
711. Corcoran C, Jacobs TF. Metformin.
StatPearls. Available at: https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30085525/.
Accessed May 2, 2022
712. Pu R, Shi D, Gan T, et al. Effects of met-
formin in obesity treatment in differ-
ent populations: a meta-analysis. Ther
Adv Endocrinol Metab. 2020;11:
2042018820926000
713. Wilson DM, Abrams SH, Aye T, et al;
Glaser Pediatric Research Network
Obesity Study Group. Metformin ex-
tended release treatment of adoles-
cent obesity: a 48-week randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
with 48-week follow-up. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med. 2010;164(2):116–123
714. Yanovski JA, Krakoff J, Salaita CG, et al.
Effects of metformin on body weight
and body composition in obese insulin-
resistant children: a randomized clinical
trial. Diabetes. 2011;60(2):477–485
715. van der Aa MP, Elst MA, van de Garde
EM, van Mil EG, Knibbe CA, van der
Vorst MM. Long-term treatment with
metformin in obese, insulin-resistant
adolescents: results of a randomized
double-blinded placebo-controlled trial.
Nutr Diabetes. 2016;6(8):e228
716. Akcam M, Boyaci A, Pirgon O, Kaya S,
Uysal S, Dundar BN. Therapeutic effect
of metformin and vitamin E versus
prescriptive diet in obese adolescents
with fatty liver. Int J Vitam Nutr Res.
2011;81(6):398–406
717. Atabek ME, Pirgon O. Use of metformin
in obese adolescents with hyperinsuli-
nemia: a 6-month, randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial.
J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2008;
21(4):339–348
718. Burgert TS, Duran EJ, Goldberg-Gell R,
et al. Short-term metabolic and car-
diovascular effects of metformin in
markedly obese adolescents with nor-
mal glucose tolerance. Pediatr Diabe-
tes. 2008;9(6):567–576
719. Casteels K, Fieuws S, van Helvoirt M,
et al. Metformin therapy to reduce
weight gain and visceral adiposity in
children and adolescents with neuro-
genic or myogenic motor deficit. Pe-
diatr Diabetes. 2010;11(1):61–69
720. Clarson CL, Mahmud FH, Baker JE,
et al. Metformin in combination with
structured lifestyle intervention im-
proved body mass index in obese ado-
lescents, but did not improve insulin
resistance. Endocrine. 2009;36(1):
141–146
721. Freemark M, Bursey D. The effects of
metformin on body mass index and
glucose tolerance in obese adoles-
cents with fasting hyperinsulinemia
and a family history of type 2 diabe-
tes. Pediatrics. 2001;107(4):E55
722. Kendall D, Vail A, Amin R, et al. Metfor-
min in obese children and adoles-
cents: the MOCA trial. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98(1):322–329
723. Rynders C, Weltman A, Delgiorno C,
et al. Lifestyle intervention improves
fitness independent of metformin in
obese adolescents. Med Sci Sports Ex-
erc. 2012;44(5):786–792
724. Srinivasan S, Ambler GR, Baur LA,
et al. Randomized, controlled trial of
metformin for obesity and insulin re-
sistance in children and adolescents:
improvement in body composition and
fasting insulin. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2006;91(6):2074–2080
725. Allen HF, Mazzoni C, Heptulla RA, et al.
Randomized controlled trial evaluating
response to metformin versus stan-
dard therapy in the treatment of
adolescents with polycystic ovary
syndrome. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab.
2005;18(8):761–768
726. Evia-Viscarra ML, Rodea-Montero ER,
Apolinar-Jimenez E, et al. The effects
of metformin on inflammatory media-
tors in obese adolescents with insulin
resistance: controlled randomized clin-
ical trial. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab.
2012;25(1-2):41–49
727. Mauras N, DelGiorno C, Hossain J,
et al. Metformin use in children with
obesity and normal glucose toler-
ance–effects on cardiovascular
markers and intrahepatic fat.
J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2012;25
(1-2):33–40
728. Pastor-Villaescusa B, Ca~nete MD,
Caballero-Villarraso J, et al. Metformin
for obesity in prepubertal and puber-
tal children: a randomized controlled
trial. Pediatrics. 2017;140(1):e20164285
729. Chanoine JP, Hampl S, Jensen C,
Boldrin M, Hauptman J. Effect of
orlistat on weight and body
composition in obese adolescents: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2005;293(23):2873–2883
730. Ozkan B, Bereket A, Turan S, Keskin S.
Addition of orlistat to conventional
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
97
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 98]
treatment in adolescents with severe
obesity. Eur J Pediatr. 2004;163(12):
738–741
731. Kelly AS, Bensignor MO, Hsia DS, et al
Varghese for the Trial Investigators.
Phentermine/topiramate for the treat-
ment of adolescent obesity. N Engl J
Med Evid. 2022;1(6)
732. Olbers T, Beamish AJ, Gronowitz E,
et al. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric
bypass in adolescents with severe
obesity (AMOS): a prospective, 5-year,
Swedish nationwide study. Lancet Dia-
betes Endocrinol. 2017;5(3):174–183
733. Pratt JSA, Browne A, Browne NT, et al.
ASMBS pediatric metabolic and bariat-
ric surgery guidelines, 2018. Surg
Obes Relat Dis. 2018;14(7):882–901
734. Inge TH, Courcoulas AP, Jenkins TM,
et al; Teen-LABS Consortium. Weight
loss and health status 3 years after
bariatric surgery in adolescents. N
Engl J Med. 2016;374(2):113–123
735. Michalsky MP, Inge TH, Jenkins TM,
et al; Teen-LABS Consortium. Cardio-
vascular risk factors after adolescent
bariatric surgery. Pediatrics.
2018;141(2):e20172485
736. Inge TH, Courcoulas AP, Jenkins TM,
et al; Teen–LABS Consortium. Five-year
outcomes of gastric bypass in adoles-
cents as compared with adults. N Engl
J Med. 2019;380(22):2136–2145
737. Alqahtani A, Elahmedi M, Qahtani AR.
Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy in
children younger than 14 years: refut-
ing the concerns. Ann Surg. 2016;
263(2):312–319
738. Alqahtani AR, Elahmedi M, Abdurabu
HY, Alqahtani S. Ten-year outcomes of
children and adolescents who under-
went sleeve gastrectomy: weight loss,
comorbidity resolution, adverse
events, and growth velocity. J Am Coll
Surg. 2021;233(6):657–664
739. Olshansky SJ, Passaro DJ, Hershow
RC, et al. A potential decline in life ex-
pectancy in the United States in the
21st century. N Engl J Med. 2005;
352(11):1138–1145
740. Chang S-H, Stoll CRT, Song J, Varela JE,
Eagon CJ, Colditz GA. The effectiveness
and risks of bariatric surgery: an up-
dated systematic review and meta-
analysis, 2003-2012. JAMA Surg.
2014;149(3):275–287
741. Dewberry LC, Jalivand A, Gupta R,
et al. Weight loss and health status 5
years after adjustable gastric banding
in adolescents. Obes Surg. 2020;30(6):
2388–2394
742. Himpens J, Cadiere GB, Bazi M, Vouche
M, Cadiere B, Dapri G. Long-term out-
comes of laparoscopic adjustable gas-
tric banding. Arch Surg. 2011;146(7):
802–807
743. Zitsman JLDM, DiGiorgi MF, Fennoy I,
Kopchinski JS, Sysko R, Devlin MJ. Ado-
lescent laparoscopic adjustable gas-
tric banding (LAGB): prospective
results in 137 patients followed for 3
years. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2015;11(1):
101–109
744. G€othberg G, Gronowitz E, Flodmark CE,
et al. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric
bypass in adolescents with morbid
obesity–surgical aspects and clinical
outcome. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2014;
23(1):11–16
745. O’Brien PE, Sawyer SM, Laurie C, et al.
Laparoscopic adjustable gastric band-
ing in severely obese adolescents: a
randomized trial. JAMA.
2010;303(6):519–526
746. Olbers T, Gronowitz E, Werling M, et al.
Two-year outcome of laparoscopic
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in adoles-
cents with severe obesity:
results from a Swedish Nationwide
Study (AMOS). Int J Obes. 2012;36(11):
1388–1395
747. Olbers T, Beamish AJ, Gronowitz E,
et al. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric
bypass in adolescents with severe
obesity (AMOS): a prospective, 5-year,
Swedish nationwide study. Lancet Dia-
betes Endocrinol. 2017;5(3):174–183
748. Ryder JR, Gross AC, Fox CK, et al. Fac-
tors associated with long-term weight-
loss maintenance following bariatric
surgery in adolescents with severe
obesity. Int J Obes. 2018;42(1):102–107
749. Hardin AP, Hackell JM; Committee on
Practice and Ambulatory Medicine.
Age limit of pediatrics. Pediatrics.
2017;140(3):e20172151
750. Association of Maternal and Child
Health Programs. Standards for Sys-
tems of Care for Children. Washington,
DC: Association of Maternal and Child
Health Programs; 2014
751. Kebbe M, Perez A, Ball GDC. Is there a
role for shared decision-making in pe-
diatric weight management? Obes Res
Clin Pract. 2018;12(2):246–248
752. Christison AL, Vaidya S, Tinajero-Deck
L, Hampl SE. Application of the medical
neighborhood to children with severe
obesity. Child Obes. 2018;14(7):461–467
753. Moore J, Haemer M, Mirza N, et al.
Pilot testing of a patient decision aid
for adolescents with severe obesity in
us pediatric weight management pro-
grams within the COMPASS Network.
Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019;
16(10):1776
754. Turer CB, Monta~no S, Lin H, Hoang K,
Flores G. Pediatricians’ communication
about weight with overweight Latino
children and their parents. Pediatrics.
2014;134(5):892–899
755. Daniels SR, Hassink SG; Committee on
Nutrition. The role of the pediatrician
in primary prevention of obesity.
Pediatrics. 2015;136(1):e275–e292
756. Hart LC, Patel-Nguyen SV, Merkley MG,
Jonas DE. An evidence map for
interventions addressing transition
from pediatric to adult care: a
systematic review of systematic
reviews. J Pediatr Nurs. 2019;48:
18–34
757. American Academy of Pediatrics;
American Academy of Family Physi-
cians; American College of Physicians-
American Society of Internal Medicine.
A consensus statement on health care
transitions for young adults with spe-
cial health care needs. Pediatrics.
2002;110(6 Pt 2):1304–1306
758. Schultz AT, Smaldone A. Components
of interventions that improve transi-
tions to adult care for adolescents
with type 1 diabetes. J Adolesc Health.
2017;60(2):133–146
759. Shrewsbury VA, Baur LA, Nguyen B,
Steinbeck KS. Transition to adult care
in adolescent obesity: a systematic re-
view and why it is a neglected topic.
Int J Obes. 2014;38(4):475–479
760. Uzark K, Yu S, Lowery R, et al. Transi-
tion readiness in teens and young
adults with congenital heart disease:
can we make a difference? J Pediatr.
2020;221:201–206.e1
761. Hankins JS, Osarogiagbon R,
Adams-Graves P, et al. A transition
98
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 99]
pilot program for adolescents with
sickle cell disease. J Pediatr Health
Care. 2012;26(6):e45–e49
762. Saulsberry AC, Hodges JR, Cole A,
Porter JS, Hankins J. Web-based
technology to improve disease knowl-
edge among adolescents with sickle
cell disease: pilot study. JMIR Pediatr
Parent. 2020;3(1):e15093
763. Blum RW, Garell D, Hodgman CH, et al.
Transition from child-centered to adult
health-care systems for adolescents
with chronic conditions. A position pa-
per of the Society for Adolescent Medi-
cine. J Adolesc Health. 1993;14(7):
570–576
764. Chu PY, Maslow GR, von Isenburg M,
Chung RJ. Systematic review of the im-
pact of transition interventions for
adolescents with chronic illness on
transfer from pediatric to adult
healthcare. J Pediatr Nurs. 2015;30(5):
e19–e27
765. Cairo SB, Majumdar I, Pryor A, Posner
A, Harmon CM, Rothstein DH; Delivery
of Surgical Care Committee of the
American Academy of Pediatrics Sec-
tion on Surgery. Challenges in transi-
tion of care for pediatric patients
after weight-reduction surgery: a sys-
tematic review and recommendations
for comprehensive care. Obes Surg.
2018;28(4):1149–1174
766. Leyser A, Taube-Schiff M, Daniel KS,
Toulany A. Transition of care in obesity
management: bridging the gap
between pediatric and adult health
care services. Can J Diabetes.
2015;39(1):S15
767. White PH, Cooley WC; Transitions Clini-
cal Report Authoring Group; American
Academy of Pediatrics; American Acad-
emy of Family Physicians; American
College of Physicians. Supporting the
health care transition from adoles-
cence to adulthood in the medical
home. Pediatrics. 2018;142(5):
e20182587
768. Yanovski SZ, Yanovski JA. Long-term
drug treatment for obesity: a system-
atic and clinical review. JAMA. 2014;
311(1):74–86
769. Department of the Treasury, Internal
Revenue Service; Department of Labor,
Employee Benefits Security Administra-
tion; Department of Health and Human
Services. Coverage of Certain Preven-
tive Services Under the Affordable
Care Act. Final rules. Fed Regist.
2015;80(134):41317–41347
770. Staiano A, Marker A, Liu M, Hayden E,
Hsia D, Broyles S. Childhood obesity
screening and treatment practices of
pediatric healthcare providers. J La
State Med Soc. 2017;169(1):2–10
771. Gortmaker SL, Wang YC, Long MW,
et al. Three interventions that reduce
childhood obesity are projected to
save more than they cost to imple-
ment. Health Aff (Millwood). 2015;
34(11):1932–1939
772. Kenney EL, Barrett JL, Bleich SN, Ward
ZJ, Cradock AL, Gortmaker SL. Impact
of the healthy, hunger-free kids act on
obesity trends. Health Aff (Millwood).
2020;39(7):1122–1129
773. Kristensen AH, Flottemesch TJ, Macio-
sek MV, et al. Reducing childhood obe-
sity through U.S. federal policy: a
microsimulation analysis. Am J Prev
Med. 2014;47(5):604–612
774. Mackey ER, Burton ET, Cadieux A, et al.
Addressing structural racism is criti-
cal for ameliorating the childhood obe-
sity epidemic in black youth. Child
Obes. 2022;18(2):75–83
775. Odulana A, Basco WT, Bishu KG, Egede LE.
Dietary and physical activity counseling
trends in U.S. children, 2002-2011. Am J
Prev Med. 2017;53(1):9–16
776. Imoisili OE, Goodman AB, Dooyema
CA, Harrison MR, Belay B, Park S.
Screening and referral for child-
hood obesity: adherence to the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force rec-
ommendation. Am J Prev Med.
2019;56(2):179–186
777. Fowler LA, Grammer AC, Staiano AE,
et al. Harnessing technological solu-
tions for childhood obesity prevention
and treatment: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of current applica-
tions. Int J Obes. 2021;45(5):957–981
778. Ramsetty A, Adams C. Impact of the
digital divide in the age of COVID-19.
J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020;27(7):
1147–1148
779. Dorsey ER, Topol EJ. State of telehealth.
N Engl J Med. 2016;375(2):154–161
780. Boyd RW, Lindo EG, Weeks LD,
McLemore MR. On racism: a new
standard for publishing on racial
health inequities. Available at: https://
www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/
forefront.20200630.939347/. Accessed
March 1, 2021
781. Cabana MD, Rand CS, Powe NR, et al.
Why don’t physicians follow clinical
practice guidelines? A framework for
improvement. JAMA. 1999;282(15):
1458–1465
782. Ayash CR, Simon SR, Marshall R, et al.
Evaluating the impact of point- of-care
decision support tools in improving di-
agnosis of obese children in primary
care. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013;
21(3):576–582
783. Sharifi M, Franz C, Horan CM, et al.
Cost-effectiveness of a clinical child-
hood obesity intervention.
Pediatrics. 2017;140(5):e20162998
784. Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality. The healthy weight care assis-
tant. Available at: https://cds.ahrq.gov/
cdsconnect/artifact/healthy-weight-
care-assistant. Accessed October 5,
2022
785. Bronder KL, Dooyema CA, Onufrak SJ,
Foltz JL. Electronic health records to
support obesity-related patient care:
results from a survey of United States
physicians. Prev Med. 2015;77:41–47
786. Harrison MR, Lundeen EA, Belay B,
Goodman AB. Clinical decision sup-
ports in electronic health records to
promote childhood obesity-related
care: results from a 2015 survey of
healthcare providers. Clin Nutr Res.
2019;8(4):255–264
787. Temple MW, Sisk B, Krams LA,
Schneider JH, Kirkendall ES, Lehmann
CU. Trends in use of electronic health
records in pediatric office settings.
J Pediatr. 2019;206:164–171.e2
788. Marcus MD, Foster GD, El Ghormli L.
Stability of relative weight category
and cardiometabolic risk factors
among moderately and severely obese
middle school youth. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2014;22(4):1118–1125
789. American Diabetes Association. 3.
Prevention or delay of type 2 diabetes:
standards of medical care in diabetes-
2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42
(Suppl 1):S29–S33
790. Hannon TS, Janosky J, Arslanian SA.
Longitudinal study of physiologic
PEDIATRICS Volume 151, number 2, February 2023
99
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest

[page 100]
insulin resistance and metabolic
changes of puberty. Pediatr Res.
2006;60(6):759–763
791. Moran A, Jacobs DR Jr, Steinberger J,
et al. Insulin resistance during puberty:
results from clamp studies in 357 chil-
dren. Diabetes. 1999;48(10):2039–2044
792. Kleber M, Lass N, Papcke S, Wabitsch
M, Reinehr T. One-year follow-up of
untreated obese white children and
adolescents with impaired glucose
tolerance: high conversion rate to nor-
mal glucose tolerance. Diabet Med.
2010;27(5):516–521
793. Weiss R, Taksali SE, Tamborlane WV,
Burgert TS, Savoye M, Caprio S. Pre-
dictors of changes in glucose toler-
ance status in obese youth. Diabetes
Care. 2005;28(4):902–909
794. Tamborlane WV, Barrientos-Perez M,
Fainberg U, et al; Ellipse Trial Investiga-
tors. Liraglutide in children and ado-
lescents with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J
Med. 2019;381(7):637–646
795. Sheka AC, Adeyi O, Thompson J,
Hameed B, Crawford PA, Ikramuddin S.
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: a review.
JAMA. 2020;323(12):1175–1183
796. Corey KE, Rinella ME. Medical and
surgical treatment options for nonal-
coholic steatohepatitis. Dig Dis Sci.
2016;61(5):1387–1397
797. Lavine JE, Schwimmer JB, Van Natta
ML, et al; Nonalcoholic Steatohepa-
titis Clinical Research Network. Ef-
fect of vitamin E or metformin for
treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease in children and adoles-
cents: the TONIC randomized con-
trolled trial. JAMA. 2011;305(16):
1659–1668
798. Schwimmer JB, Ugalde-Nicalo P, Welsh
JA, et al. Effect of a low free sugar
diet vs usual diet on nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease in adolescent boys: a
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;
321(3):256–265
799. Burrello J, Erhardt EM, Saint-Hilary G,
et al. Pharmacological treatment of
arterial hypertension in children and
adolescents: a network meta-analysis.
Hypertension. 2018;72(2):306–313
800. Cheung AH, Zuckerbrot RA, Jensen PS,
Laraque D, Stein REK; GLAD-PC Steering
Group. Guidelines for adolescent de-
pression in primary care (GLAD-PC):
part II. treatment and ongoing man-
agement. Pediatrics. 2018;141(3):
e20174082
801. Wall M, McDermott MP, Kieburtz KD,
et al; NORDIC Idiopathic Intracranial
Hypertension Study Group Writing
Committee. Effect of acetazolamide on
visual function in patients with idio-
pathic intracranial hypertension and
mild visual loss: the idiopathic intra-
cranial hypertension treatment trial.
JAMA. 2014;311(16):1641–1651
100
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/151/2/e2022060640/1440824/peds_2022060640.pdf
by guest