

[page 1]
Menu
An official website of the United States government
Español
Home
About Cancer
Cancer Causes and Prevention
Risk Factors 
Common Cancer Myths and Misconceptions
Common Cancer Myths and Misconceptions
Certain popular ideas about how cancer starts and spreads—though scientifically wrong—
can seem to make sense, especially when those ideas are rooted in old theories. But wrong
ideas about cancer can lead to needless worry and even hinder good prevention and
treatment decisions. This page provides the latest science-based information about some
common cancer myths and misconceptions.
On This Page
Is cancer a death sentence?
Will eating sugar make my cancer worse?
Is cancer contagious?
Can cancer surgery or a tumor biopsy cause cancer to spread in the body?
Does my attitude—positive or negative—determine my risk of getting or surviving
cancer?
Will cancer get worse if exposed to air?
Do cell phones cause cancer?
Do power lines cause cancer?
Are there herbal products that can cure cancer?
If someone in my family has cancer, am I likely to get cancer, too?
If no one in my family has had cancer, does that mean I’m risk-free?
Do antiperspirants or deodorants cause breast cancer?
Is cancer a death sentence?

[page 2]
In the United States, the likelihood of dying from cancer has dropped steadily since the
1990s. Five-year survival rates for some cancers, such as breast, prostate, and thyroid
cancers, now are 90 percent or better. The 5-year survival rate for all cancers combined is
currently about 69 percent. For more information, see the Annual Report to the Nation on
the Status of Cancer.
It is important to note, however, that these rates are based on data from large numbers of
people. How long an individual cancer patient will live and whether he or she will die from
the disease depend on many factors, including whether the cancer is slow or fast growing,
how much the cancer has spread in the body, whether effective treatments are available,
the person’s overall health, and more.
Will eating sugar make my cancer worse?
No. Although research has shown that cancer cells consume
more sugar (glucose) than normal cells, no studies have shown
that eating sugar will make your cancer worse or that, if you
stop eating sugar, your cancer will shrink or disappear.
However, a high-sugar diet may contribute to excess weight
gain, and obesity is associated with an increased risk of
developing several types of cancer. For more information, see
the NCI fact sheet on Obesity and Cancer.
Is cancer contagious?
In general, no. Cancer is not a contagious disease that easily spreads from person to
person. The only situation in which cancer can spread from one person to another is in the
case of organ or tissue transplantation. A person who receives an organ or tissue from a
donor who had cancer in the past may be at increased risk of developing a transplant-
related cancer in the future. However, that risk is extremely low—about two cases of cancer
per 10,000 organ transplants. Doctors avoid the use of organs or tissue from donors who
have a history of cancer.
In some people, cancers may be caused by certain viruses (some types of human
papillomavirus, or HPV, for example) and bacteria (such as Helicobacter pylori). While a virus
or bacterium can spread from person to person, the cancers they sometimes cause cannot
spread from person to person. For more information about cancer-causing viruses and
bacteria, see the NCI fact sheet on Helicobacter pylori and Cancer and our pages on HPV
and Cancer and Infectious Agents.

[page 3]
Can cancer surgery or a tumor biopsy cause cancer
to spread in the body?
The chance that surgery will cause cancer to spread to other
parts of the body is extremely low. Following standard
procedures, surgeons use special methods and take many steps
to prevent cancer cells from spreading during biopsies or
surgery to remove tumors. For example, if they must remove
tissue from more than one area of the body, they use different
surgical tools for each area. For information about how cancer
spreads in the body, see our page on Metastatic Cancer.
Does my attitude—positive or negative—determine
my risk of getting or surviving cancer?
To date, there is no convincing scientific evidence that links a
person’s “attitude” to their risk of developing or dying from
cancer. If you have cancer, it’s normal to feel sad, angry, or
discouraged sometimes and positive or upbeat at other times.
People with a positive attitude may be more likely to maintain
social connections and stay active, and physical activity and
emotional support may help you cope with your cancer. For
more information, see the NCI fact sheet on Stress and Cancer.
Will cancer get worse if exposed to air?
No. Exposure to air will not make tumors grow faster or cause cancer to spread to other
parts of the body. For information about how cancer spreads in the body, see our page on
Metastatic Cancer.
Do cell phones cause cancer?
No, not according to the best studies completed so far. Cancer
is caused by genetic mutations, and cell phones emit a type of
low-frequency energy that does not damage genes. For more
information, see the NCI fact sheet on Cell Phones and Cancer
Risk.

[page 4]
Do power lines cause cancer?
No, not according to the best studies completed so far. Power lines emit both electric and
magnetic energy. The electric energy emitted by power lines is easily shielded or weakened
by walls and other objects. The magnetic energy emitted by power lines is a low-frequency
form of radiation that does not damage genes. For more information, see the NCI fact
sheet on Electromagnetic Fields and Cancer.
Are there herbal products that can cure cancer?
No. Although some studies suggest that alternative or
complementary therapies, including some herbs, may help
patients cope with the side effects of cancer treatment, no
herbal products have been shown to be effective for treating
cancer. In fact, some herbal products may be harmful when
taken during chemotherapy or radiation therapy because they
may interfere with how these treatments work. Cancer patients should talk with their
doctor about any complementary and alternative medicine products—including vitamins
and herbal supplements—they may be using. For more information, see Complementary
and Alternative Medicine.
If someone in my family has cancer, am I likely to get
cancer, too?
Not necessarily. Cancer is caused by harmful
changes (mutations) in genes. Only about 5 to 10
percent of cancers are caused by harmful
mutations that are inherited from a person’s
parents. In families with an inherited cancer-
causing mutation, multiple family members will
often develop the same type of cancer. These
cancers are called “familial” or “hereditary”
cancers.
The remaining 90 to 95 percent of cancers are caused by mutations that happen during a
person’s lifetime as a natural result of aging and exposure to environmental factors, such
as tobacco smoke and radiation. These cancers are called “non-hereditary” or
“spontaneous” cancers. For more information about the risk of getting cancer, see the NCI
fact sheet on Genetic Testing for Inherited Cancer Risk and Cancer Causes and Risk Factors.

[page 5]
If no one in my family has had cancer, does that mean
I’m risk-free?
No. Based on the most recent data, about 39 percent of men and women will be diagnosed
with cancer at some point during their lives. Most cancers are caused by genetic changes
that occur throughout a person’s lifetime as a natural result of aging and exposure to
environmental factors, such as tobacco smoke and radiation. Other factors, such as what
kind of food you eat, how much you eat, and whether you exercise, may also influence your
risk of developing cancer. For more information, see Cancer Causes and Risk Factors.
Do antiperspirants or deodorants cause breast
cancer?
No. The best studies so far have found no evidence linking the
chemicals typically found in antiperspirants and deodorants
with changes in breast tissue. For more information, see the NCI
fact sheet on Antiperspirants/Deodorants and Breast Cancer.
Updated: July 24, 2024
If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for
guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please
credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the
original product's title; e.g., “Common Cancer Myths and Misconceptions was originally published
by the National Cancer Institute.”
Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication
services page shows you how.
About
About This Website
en Español
Resources
Contact Us
Publications
Sign up for email
updates
Enter your email address

[page 6]
Reuse & Copyright
Social Media
Dictionary of Cancer Terms
Find a Clinical Trial
Policies
Accessibility
FOIA
Privacy & Security
Disclaimers
Vulnerability Disclosure
Sign up
National Cancer Institute
at the National Institutes of Health
Contact Us
Live Chat
1-800-4-CANCER
NCIinfo@nih.gov
Site Feedback
Follow us
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health
National Cancer Institute
USA.gov