

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Conditional cash
transfer programmes
and nutritional status
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Conditional cash transfer programmes give money to households on the condition that
they comply with certain pre-defined requirements. These conditions can include, for
example, up-to-date vaccinations, regular visits to a health care facility, regular school
attendance by children, and complying with health and nutrition promotion activities
(e.g. attending education sessions, taking nutritional supplements, etc.). Conditional
cash transfer programmes are aimed at reducing poverty as well as breaking the cycle
of poverty for the next generation through the development of human capital.

[page 2]
Current evidence suggests that conditional cash transfer programmes can be effective
in increasing the use of health services and improving health outcomes including
nutritional status, however, further research is needed before specific
recommendations can be made.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
The impact of conditional cash transfers on health outcomes and use of health services in low
and middle income countries
Lagarde M, Haines A, Palmer N.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2009, Issue 4. Art. No.:
CD008137.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Financial incentives and coverage of child health interventions: a systematic review and meta-
analysis
Bassani DG, Arora P, Wazny K, Gaffey MF, Lenters L, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2013;13 Suppl 3:S30.
Learn More 
Cost-effectivenеss
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Category 2 intervention

[page 3]
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
The impact of conditional cash
transfers on health outcomes and
the use of health services in low- and
middle-income countries
Commentary
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO