

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Continued
breastfeeding for
healthy growth and
development of
children
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Breastfeeding has many health benefits for both the mother and infant. Breast milk
contains all the nutrients an infant needs in the first six months of life. Breastfeeding
protects against diarrhoea and common childhood illnesses such as pneumonia, and
may also have longer-term health benefits for the mother and child, such as reducing
the risk of overweight and obesity in childhood and adolescence.

[page 2]
Breastfeeding continues to make an important nutritional contribution well beyond the
first year of life as a significant energy source and by providing key nutrients to the
growing infant. Studies in developing countries demonstrate that continued, frequent
breastfeeding is associated with greater linear growth and further protects child health
by delaying maternal fertility postpartum and reducing the child’s risk of morbidity and
mortality. Continued breastfeeding may also prevent dehydration in those recovering
from infections.
WHO Recommendations
Infants should be exclusively breastfed for the first six months of life to achieve optimal
growth, development and health.
Thereafter, to meet their evolving nutritional requirements, infants should receive
nutritionally adequate and safe complementary foods, while continuing to breastfeed
for up to two years or beyond.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding
Guiding principles for complementary feeding of the breastfed child
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Support for healthy breastfeeding mothers with healthy term babies
McFadden A, Gavine A, Renfrew MJ, Wade A, Buchanan P, Taylor JL, Veitch E, Rennie AM, Crowther SA,
Neiman S, MacGillivray S.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD001141.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
The association between breastfeeding and childhood obesity: a meta-analysis
Yan J, Liu L, Zhu Y, Huang G, Wang PP. BMC Public Health. 2014; 14:1267.
Breastfeeding and maternal health outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Chowdhury R, Sinha B, Sankar MJ, Taneja S, Bhandari N, Rollins N, et al. Acta Paediatrica. 2015; 104: 96–
113.
Long-term consequences of breastfeeding on cholesterol, obesity, systolic blood pressure and
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Horta BL, Loret de Mola C, Victora CG. Acta Paediatrica. 2015; 104: 30–37.
Optimal breastfeeding practices and infant and child mortality: a systematic review and meta-
analysis
Sankar MJ, Sinha B, Chowdhury R, Bhandari N, Taneja S, Martines J, Bahl R. Acta Paediatrica. 2015; 104: 3–
13.
Systematic review and meta-analyses of risk factors for childhood overweight identifiable
during infancy
Weng SF, Redsell SA, Swift JA, Yang M, Glazebrook CP. Archives of Disease in Childhood. 2012; 97(12):1019-
26.
Breastfeeding and intelligence: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Horta BL, Loret de Mola C, Victora CG. Acta Paediatrica. 2015; 104: 14-9.

[page 4]
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Cost effectiveness analysis of strategies for child health in developing countries
Edejer TT, Aikins M, Black R, Wolfson L, Hutubessy R, Evans DB. BMJ. 2005; 331(7526):1177.
Potential economic impacts from improving breastfeeding rates in the UK
Pokhrel S, Quigley MA, Fox-Rushby J, McCormick F, Williams A, Trueman P, et al. Arch Dis Child. 2015;
100(4):334-40.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Continued breastfeeding for healthy
growth and development of children
Category 2 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Commentary

[page 5]
Continued breastfeeding for healthy
growth and development of children
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO