

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Creating an
environment in care
facilities that supports
breastfeeding
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Breastfeeding has many health benefits for both the mother and infant. Breast milk
contains all the nutrients an infant needs in the first six months of life. Breastfeeding
protects against diarrhoea and common childhood illnesses such as pneumonia, and
may also have longer-term health benefits, such as reducing the risk of overweight and
obesity in childhood and adolescence..
To reduce infant mortality and ill health, WHO recommends that mothers begin
breastfeeding their infants within one hour of birth. Infants should also be exclusively

[page 2]
establishing and maintaining breastfeeding policies that cover all established
standards of practice *, which are fully implemented and publicly and regularly
communicated to staff;
training of health workers to further develop relevant skills, ensure consistent
messages and support implementation of policy standards according to their roles;
and
planning and coordination of discharge from the facility, such that parents and their
children have access to continuing and consistent breastfeeding support after
leaving the facility.
breastfed for the first six months of life to achieve optimal growth, development and
health, with continued breastfeeding up to two years of age or beyond. In support of
these recommendations, breastfeeding must be protected, supported and promoted in
facilities providing maternal and newborn services. This includes:
* Standards of practice are described in the WHO document, Standards for improving
quality of maternal and newborn care in health facilities, and include ensuring that
women receive emotional support, are taken care of in facilities that are safe and
adequately equipped, and that every woman and newborn receives routine, evidence-
based care and management of complications during labour, childbirth and the early
postnatal period, according to WHO guidelines.
WHO Recommendations
Facilities providing maternity and newborn services should have a clearly written
breastfeeding policy that is routinely communicated to staff and parents.
Health-facility staff who provide infant feeding services, including breastfeeding
support, should have sufficient knowledge, competence and skills to support women to
breastfeed.
As part of protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding, discharge from facilities
providing maternity and newborn services should be planned for and coordinated, so
that parents and their infants have access to ongoing support and appropriate care.
Facilities providing maternity and newborn services should enable mothers and their
infants to remain together and to practise rooming-in throughout the day and night.
This may not apply in circumstances when infants need to be moved for specialized
medical care.

[page 3]
Where facilities provide antenatal care, pregnant women and their families should be
counselled about the benefits and management of breastfeeding.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding in
facilities providing maternity and newborn services
Implementation guidance: protecting, promoting, and supporting
breastfeeding in facilities providing maternity and newborn services:
the revised Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative 2018
Standards for improving quality of maternal and newborn care in
health facilities
Baby-friendly hospital initiative: revised, updated and expanded for
integrated care
Innocenti Declaration on the protection, promotion and support of
breastfeeding
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 4]
Innocenti Declaration 2005 on infant and young child feeding
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Antenatal breastfeeding education for increasing breastfeeding duration
Lumbiganon P, Martis R, Laopaiboon M, Festin MR, Ho JJ, Hakimi M. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2016; Issue 12. Art. No.: CD006425.
Summary of this review 
Interventions for promoting the initiation of breastfeeding
Balogun OO, O’Sullivan EJ, McFadden A, Ota E, Gavine A, Garner CD et al. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 11. Art. No.: CD001688.
Education and training of healthcare staff in the knowledge, attitudes and skills needed to
work effectively with breastfeeding women: a systematic review
Gavine A, MacGillivray S, Renfrew MJ, Siebelt L, Haggi H, McFadden A. International Breastfeeding Journal.
2017;12:6.
Hospitals with a written breastfeeding policy statement and implementation of the steps of
breastfeeding: a systematic review (publication pending)
Rooming-in for new mother and infant versus separate care for increasing the duration of
breastfeeding

[page 5]
Jaafar SH, Ho JJ, Lee KS.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.: CD006641.
Summary of this review 
Health Facility Staff Training for Improving Breastfeeding Outcome: A Systematic Review for
Step 2 of the Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative
Balogun OO, Dagvadorj A, Yourkavitch J, da Silva Lopes K, Suto M, Takemoto Y, et al. Breastfeeding
Medicine. 2017;12(9):537-546.
Providing linkage to breastfeeding support to mothers on discharge to improve breastfeeding
outcomes: a systematic review (publication pending)
Related systematic reviews
Breastfeeding Peer Counseling: From Efficacy through Scale-up
Chapman DJ, Morel K, Anderson AK, Damio G, Pérez-Escamilla R. Journal of Human Lactation. 2010;
26(3):314–326.
Breastfeeding promotion interventions and breastfeeding practices: a systematic review
Haroon S, Das JK, Salam RA, Imdad A, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2013; 13(Suppl 3):S20.
Interventions to improve breastfeeding outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Sinha B, Chowdhury R, Sankar MJ, Martines J, Taneja S, Mazumder S, et al. Acta Paediatrica. 2015;
104:114–134.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Potential economic impacts from improving breastfeeding rates in the UK
Pokhrel S, Quigley MA, Fox-Rushby J, McCormick F, Williams A, Trueman P, et al. Arch Dis Child. 2015;
100(4):334-40.
Cost-effectiveness of peer counselling for the promotion of exclusive breastfeeding in Uganda
Chola L, Fadnes LT, Engebretsen IM, Nkonki L, Nankabirwa V, Sommerfelt H, et al. PLoS One. 2015;
10(11):e0142718.

[page 6]
Economic evaluation of enhanced staff contact for the promotion of breastfeeding for low
birth weight infants
Rice SJ, Craig D, McCormick F, Renfrew MJ, Williams AF. Int J Technol Assess Health Care. 2010; 26(2):133-40.
Breastfeeding promotion for infants in neonatal units: a systematic review and economic
analysis
Renfrew MJ, Craig D, Dyson L, McCormick F, Rice S, King SE et al. Health Technol Assess. 2009; 13(40):1-146,
iii-iv.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 7]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO