

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Cup-feeding for low-
birth-weight infants
unable to fully
breastfeed
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Every year, more than 20 million infants are born weighing less than 2.5kg – over 96% of
them in developing countries. These low-birth-weight (LBW) infants are at increased risk
of early growth retardation, infectious disease, developmental delay and death during
infancy and childhood.
Most LBW is a consequence of preterm birth, small size for gestational age, or both.

[page 2]
Interventions to improve the feeding of LBW infants are likely to improve the immediate
and longer-term health and well-being of the individual infant and have a significant
impact on neonatal and infant mortality levels in the population.
WHO recommends that LBW infants should be fed mother's own milk. If these infants
cannot be fed mother's own milk, they should be fed donor human milk (in settings
where safe and affordable milk banking facilities are available or can be set up) or
standard infant formula.
LBW infants who are unable to breastfeed can be fed by alternative oral feeding
methods such as bottle-feeding or cup-feeding. Studies comparing these methods have
shown that cup-feeding improves exclusive breastfeeding rates at discharge but these
benefits are not sustained. Cup-feeding is also associated with prolonged hospital stays.
However, as cups are easier to clean than bottles, cup-feeding could potentially reduce
the risk of severe infections such as diarrhoea.
WHO Recommendations
LBW infants who need to be fed by an alternative oral feeding method should be fed by
cup (or palladai, which is a cup with a beak) or spoon.
This recommendation does not address sick LBW infants or infants with birth
weight less than 1.0 kg.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidelines on optimal feeding of low birth-weight infants in low- and
middle-income countries
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines

[page 3]
Optimal feeding of low-birth-weight infants: technical review
Edmond K, Bahl R. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006.
Related Cochrane reviews
Avoidance of bottles during the establishment of breast feeds in preterm infants
Collins CT, Gillis J, McPhee AJ, Suganuma H, Makrides M.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016,
Issue 10. Art. No.: CD005252.
Summary of this review 
Cup feeding versus other forms of supplemental enteral feeding for newborn infants unable
to fully breastfeed
Flint A, New K, Davies MW.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.: CD005092.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions

[page 4]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO