

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Daily iron
supplementation in
children and
adolescents 5–12 years
of age in malaria-
endemic areas
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Approximately 300 million children globally had anaemia in 2011. The most common
cause of anaemia is thought to be deficiency in iron, an essential nutrient for
development and cell growth in the immune and neural systems, as well as in
regulation of energy metabolism and exercise. Iron deficiency can result from

[page 2]
inadequate intake or absorption of dietary iron, increased need during periods of
growth, and blood loss from helminth* infection or menstruation in adolescent girls.
Iron deficiency anaemia in children has been linked to increased childhood morbidity
and impaired cognitive development and school performance. Children between 5 and
12 years of age are at a critical stage of intellectual development, and optimization of
their cognitive performance during this period could have long-lasting benefits.
Malaria is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in children in sub-Saharan Africa
and is an important contributor to anaemia in other endemic regions, through direct
rupture of infected red blood cells, the body’s immune destruction of both parasitized
and uninfected red blood cells, and temporary dysfunction of the bone marrow.
Results of some studies in young children have suggested that iron supplementation
may increase the risk of malaria and death in children living in malaria-endemic regions.
However, recent evidence suggests that iron supplementation does not adversely affect
children when regular malaria surveillance and treatment services are provided.
Evidence has shown that daily iron supplementation in children 5–12 years of age is
associated with a reduced risk of iron deficiency and anaemia.
* Helminths are a group of parasites commonly referred to as worms and include
schistosomes and soil-transmitted helminths
WHO Recommendations
Daily iron supplementation is recommended as a public health intervention in school-
age children aged 60 months (i.e. 5 years old) and older, living in settings where the
prevalence of anaemia in infants and young children is 40% or higher, for preventing
iron deficiency and anaemia.
In malaria–endemic areas, the provision of iron supplementation in infants and children
should be done in conjunction with public health measures to prevent, diagnose and
treat malaria.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Daily iron supplementation in infants and children
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effects of daily iron supplementation in primary-school-aged children: systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Low M, Farrell A, Biggs BA, Pasricha SR. CMAJ. 2013;185(17):E791-802.
Oral iron supplements for children in malaria-endemic areas
Neuberger A, Okebe J, Yahav D, Paul M. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 2. Art. No.:
CD006589.
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews
Effect of iron supplementation on haemoglobin response in children: systematic review of
randomised controlled trials
Gera T, Sachdev HPS, Nestel P, Sachdev SS. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition. 2007;
44:468–486.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO