

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Daily iron and folic acid
supplementation
during pregnancy in
malaria-endemic areas
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
It is estimated that more than 40% of pregnant women worldwide are anaemic. At least
half of this anaemia burden is assumed to be due to iron deficiency.
Pregnant women require additional iron and folic acid to meet their own nutritional
needs as well as those of the developing fetus. Deficiencies in iron and folic acid during
pregnancy can potentially negatively impact the health of the mother, her pregnancy, as
well as fetal development.

[page 2]
Pregnancy also reduces a woman’s immunity, making pregnant women more
susceptible to malaria infection and increasing the risk of illness, anaemia, severe
disease and death. For the unborn child, maternal malaria increases the risk of
spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, premature delivery and low birth weight – a leading
cause of child mortality.
Evidence has shown that the use of iron and folic acid supplements is associated with a
reduced risk of iron deficiency and anaemia in pregnant women, including in settings
where malaria is endemic.
WHO Recommendations
Daily oral iron and folic acid supplementation with 30 mg to 60 mg of elemental iron*
and 400 µg (0.4 mg) folic acid** is recommended for pregnant women to prevent
maternal anaemia, puerperal sepsis, low birth weight, and preterm birth.***
*The equivalent of 60 mg of elemental iron is 300 mg ferrous sulfate heptahydrate, 180
mg ferrous fumarate or 500 mg of ferrous gluconate.
** Folic acid should be commenced as early as possible (ideally before conception) to
prevent neural tube defects.
*** This recommendation supercedes the previous recommendation found within the
WHO guideline ‘Daily iron and folic acid supplementation in pregnant women’ (2012).
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: daily iron and folic acid supplementation in pregnant women
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines

[page 3]
Daily oral iron supplementation during pregnancy
Peña-Rosas JP, De-Regil LM, Garcia-Casal MN, Dowswell T. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2015;
Issue 7. Art. No.: CD004736.
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews
Anaemia, prenatal iron use, and risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes: systematic review and
meta-analysis
Haider BA, Olofin I, Wang M, Spiegelman D, Ezzati M, Fawzi WW et al. BMJ 2013;346:f3443.
Routine iron/folate supplementation during pregnancy: effect on maternal anaemia and birth
outcomes
Imdad A, Bhutta ZA. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology. 2012, 26:168–177.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Cost-effectiveness of invitation to food supplementation early in pregnancy combined with
multiple micronutrients on infant survival: analysis of data from MINIMat randomized trial,
Bangladesh
Shaheen R, Persson LÅ, Ahmed S, Streatfield PK, Lindholm L. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2015; 15:125.
Iron fortification and iron supplementation are cost-effective interventions to reduce iron
deficiency in four subregions of the world
Baltussen R, Knai C, Sharan M. J Nutr. 2004; 134(10):2678-84.
Cost-effectiveness of prenatal food and micronutrient interventions on under-five mortality
and stunting: Analysis of data from the MINIMat randomized trial, Bangladesh
Svefors P, Selling KE, Shaheen R, Khan AI, Persson LÅ, Lindholm L. PLoS One. 2018; 13(2):e0191260.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO