

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Daily iron
supplementation in
adult women and
adolescent girls
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Globally, one in three non-pregnant women, corresponding to almost 500 million
women, were anaemic in 2011. At least half of this anaemia burden is thought to be due
to deficiency in iron, an essential nutrient for development and cell growth in the
immune and neural systems, as well as in regulation of energy metabolism and
exercise. Iron deficiency can result from inadequate intake or absorption of dietary iron,
increased need during periods of growth, and blood loss from menstruation or
helminth* infection. Because women of reproductive age lose iron through

[page 2]
menstruation and their diets are often lacking in available iron, they are particularly
vulnerable to iron deficiency.
Evidence has shown that daily iron supplementation is associated with reduced risk of
anaemia and iron deficiency in menstruating women and adolescent girls, without any
side effects.
* Helminths are a group of parasites commonly referred to as worms and include
schistosomes and soil-transmitted helminths
WHO Recommendations
Daily iron supplementation is recommended as a public health intervention in
menstruating adult women and adolescent girls living in settings where the prevalence
of anaemia is 40% or higher in this age group, for the prevention of anaemia and iron
deficiency.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Daily iron supplementation in adult women and adolescent girls
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Daily iron supplementation for improving iron status and health among menstruating women
Low MSY, Speedy J, Styles CE, De-Regil LM, Pasricha SR. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016;
Issue 4. Art. No.: CD009747.
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews

[page 3]
Iron Supplementation Benefits Physical Performance in Women of Reproductive Age: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Pasricha SR, Low M, Thompson J, Farrell A, De-Regil LM. J Nutr. 2014;144(6):906-14.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 4]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO