

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Daily iron
supplementation in
children 6-23 months of
age in malaria-endemic
areas
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Approximately 300 million children globally had anaemia in 2011. The most common
cause of anaemia is thought to be deficiency in iron, an essential nutrient for
development and cell growth in the immune and neural systems, as well as in
regulation of energy metabolism and exercise. Iron deficiency can result from
inadequate intake or absorption of dietary iron, increased need during periods of
growth, and blood loss from helminth* infection.

[page 2]
Children are particularly vulnerable to iron deficiency anaemia because of their
increased iron requirements in the periods of rapid growth, especially in the first five
years of life. Iron deficiency anaemia in children has been linked to increased childhood
morbidity and impaired cognitive development and school performance.
Malaria is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in children in sub-Saharan Africa
and is an important contributor to anaemia in other endemic regions, through direct
rupture of infected red blood cells, the body’s immune destruction of both parasitized
and uninfected red blood cells, and temporary dysfunction of the bone marrow.
Results of some studies in young children have suggested that iron supplementation
may increase the risk of malaria and death in children living in malaria-endemic regions.
However, recent evidence suggests that iron supplementation does not adversely affect
children when regular malaria surveillance and treatment services are provided.
Evidence has shown that daily iron supplementation in children 6–23 months of age is
associated with a reduced risk of iron deficiency and anaemia.
* Helminths are a group of parasites commonly referred to as worms and include
schistosomes and soil-transmitted helminths
WHO Recommendations
Daily iron supplementation is recommended as a public health intervention in infants
and young children aged 6–23 months, living in settings where the prevalence of
anaemia in this age group is 40% or higher*, for preventing iron deficiency and
anaemia.
In malaria–endemic areas, the provision of iron supplementation in infants and children
should be done in conjunction with public health measures to prevent, diagnose and
treat malaria.
* In the absence of prevalence data in this group, consider proxies for high risk of
anaemia. For the most recent estimates, visit the WHO-hosted Vitamin and Mineral
Nutrition Information System (VMNIS).
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Daily iron supplementation in infants and children
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Archived: Iron deficiency anaemia: assessment, prevention and control
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effect of daily iron supplementation on health in children aged 4–23 months: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials
Pasricha SR, Hayes E, Kalumba K, Biggs BA. Lancet Glob Health. 2013;1(2):e77-86.
Oral iron supplements for children in malaria-endemic areas
Neuberger A, Okebe J, Yahav D, Paul M. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 2. Art. No.:
CD006589.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Effect of iron supplementation on haemoglobin response in children: systematic review of
randomised controlled trials
Gera T, Sachdev HPS, Nestel P, Sachdev SS. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition. 2007;44:468–
486.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses

[page 4]
Cost-effectiveness of iron supplementation and malaria chemoprophylaxis in the prevention
of anaemia and malaria among Tanzanian infants
Alonzo González M, Menéndez C, Font F, Kahigwa E, Kimario J, Mshinda H, et al. Bull World Health Organ.
2000; 78(1):97-107.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is an Essential
Nutrition Action targeting the first 1000
days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 5]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO