

[page 1]
An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know
Search
Menu
Home > Health Information > “Detoxes” and “Cleanses”: What You Need To
Know
“Detoxes” and “Cleanses”:
What You Need To Know
© Thinkstock
What are “detoxes” and “cleanses”?
A variety of “detoxification” diets, regimens, and therapies—
sometimes called “detoxes” or “cleanses”—have been suggested as
ways to remove toxins from your body, lose weight, or promote
health.

[page 2]
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends
chelation therapy, a type of chemical detoxification procedure, for
removing toxic metals from the body in some specific serious cases.
This fact sheet does not address that type of detoxification.
“Detoxification” programs may involve a variety of approaches.
These include:
Fasting
Drinking only juices or similar beverages
Eating only certain foods
Using dietary supplements or other commercial products
Using herbs
Cleansing the colon (lower intestinal tract) with enemas,
laxatives, or colon hydrotherapy (also called “colonic irrigation”
or “colonics”)
Reducing environmental exposures
Using a sauna
These programs may be advertised commercially, offered at health
centers, or part of naturopathic treatment.
Some “detoxification” or “cleansing” programs can be unsafe
and falsely advertised. For more information on safety, see the
“What about safety?” section below.
What does the research say about
“detoxes” and “cleanses”?
There have been only a small number of studies on “detoxification”
programs in people. While some have had positive results on weight
and fat loss, insulin resistance, and blood pressure, the studies
themselves have been of low quality—with study design problems,
few participants, or lack of peer review (evaluation by other experts
to ensure quality).
A 2015 review concluded that there was no compelling research to
support the use of “detox” diets for weight management or
eliminating toxins from the body. A 2017 review said that juicing and
“detox” diets can cause initial weight loss because of low intake of
calories, but they tend to lead to weight gain once a person resumes
a normal diet. There have been no studies on long-term effects of
“detoxification” programs.

[page 3]
What about safety?
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) have taken action against several companies
selling detox/cleansing products because they (1) contained
hidden ingredients and may pose a significant health risk; (2)
were marketed using false claims that they could treat serious
diseases; or (3) in the case of medical devices used for colon
cleansing, were marketed for unapproved uses.  
There is limited clinical evidence validating colonic irrigation and
insufficient evidence for its prescribed uses. Colon cleansing
procedures may have side effects, some of which can be
serious. Harmful effects are more likely in people with a history
of gastrointestinal disease, colon surgery, severe hemorrhoids,
kidney disease, or heart disease.
Some juices used in “detoxes” and “cleanses” that haven’t been
pasteurized or treated in other ways to kill harmful bacteria can
make people sick. The illnesses can be serious in children,
elderly people, and those with weakened immune systems.
Some juices are made from foods that are high in oxalate, a
naturally occurring substance. Examples of high-oxalate foods
include leafy green vegetables and beets. Persons susceptible
to kidney stone formation should limit their consumption of high-
oxalate foods as these foods can present a health threat.
People with diabetes should follow the eating plan
recommended by their health care team. If you have diabetes,
consult your health care providers before making major changes
in your eating habits.
Diets that severely restrict calories or the types of food you eat
usually don’t lead to lasting weight loss and may not provide all
the nutrients you need.
“Detoxification” programs may include laxatives, which can
cause diarrhea. Acute diarrhea can lead to dehydration and
malabsorption.
Drinking large quantities of water and herbal tea and not eating
any food for days in a row could lead to dangerous electrolyte
imbalances.
Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers
about any complementary health approaches you use, including any
“detoxes” or “cleanses.” Together, you and your health care
providers can make shared, well-informed decisions.

[page 4]
Are all fasting programs considered
“detoxes” and “cleanses”?
Although some fasting programs are advertised with “detoxification”
claims, other fasting programs—including intermittent fasting and
periodic fasting—are being researched for health promotion, disease
prevention, improved aging, and in some cases weight loss. But
there are no firm conclusions about their effects on human health.
Also, fasting can cause headaches, fainting, weakness, and
dehydration.
For More Information
NCCIH Clearinghouse
The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and
complementary and integrative health approaches, including
publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and
medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice,
treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners.
Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226
Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1
Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov
Email: info@nccih.nih.gov
Know the Science
NCCIH and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) provide tools to help
you understand the basics and terminology of scientific research so you
can make well-informed decisions about your health. Know the Science
features a variety of materials, including interactive modules, quizzes,
and videos, as well as links to informative content from Federal
resources designed to help consumers make sense of health
information.
Explaining How Research Works (NIH)
Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article
Understanding Clinical Studies (NIH)
PubMed®
A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains
publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles
from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using

[page 5]
PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health
Practices on PubMed.
Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain.
Duplication is encouraged.
NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended
to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care
provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment
or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product,
service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH.
Last Updated: March 2025
Share
For Consumers
Dietary Supplements for Weight Loss
Healthy Habits for Weight Loss
Herbs At a Glance
Safe Use of Complementary Health Products and Practices
Related Fact Sheets
Weight Control
Follow NIH:
X
Facebook
LinkedIn
YouTube

[page 6]
NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health
Site Last Updated: July 15, 2026
Follow NCCIH:
Contact Us
Privacy and Policies
Accessibility
FOIA
Vulnerability Disclosure
en Español
Site Map
Archive
NCCIH Home
National Institutes of Health
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
USA.gov
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, Maryland 20892
Email Updates
®