

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Deworming in children
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Soil-transmitted helminth infections are among the most common infections in
humans, caused by a group of parasites commonly referred to as worms, including
roundworms, whipworms and hookworms. Those living in poverty are most vulnerable
to infection which can impair nutritional status by causing:

[page 2]
internal bleeding which can lead to loss of iron and anaemia;
intestinal inflammation and obstruction;
diarrhoea; and
impairment of nutrient intake, digestion and absorption.
Evidence shows that preventive chemotherapy, or the periodic large-scale
administration of anthelminthic medicines to populations at risk, can dramatically
reduce the burden of worms caused by soil-transmitted helminth infections.
Preventive chemotherapy is an important part of a comprehensive package to eliminate
morbidity due to soil-transmitted helminths in at-risk populations. However, long-term
solutions to soil-transmitted helminth infections will need to address many factors,
including improvements in water, sanitation and hygiene.
WHO Recommendations
Preventive chemotherapy (deworming), using annual or biannuala single-dose
albendazole (400 mg) or mebendazole (500 mg)b is recommended as a public health
intervention for all young children 12–23 months of age, preschool children 1–4 years of
age, and school-age children 5–12 years of age (in some settings up to 14 years of age)
living in areas where the baseline prevalence of any soil-transmitted infection is 20% or
more among children, in order to reduce the worm burden of soil-transmitted helminth
infection.
a Biannual administration is recommended where the baseline prevalence is more than
50%.
b A half-dose of albendazole (i.e. 200 mg) is recommended for children younger than 24
months of age.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Preventive chemotherapy to control soil-transmitted helminth
infections in at-risk population groups
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Helminth control in school-age children: a guide for managers of
control programmes -- First edition
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Deworming drugs for soil-transmitted intestinal worms in children: effects on nutritional
indicators, haemoglobin, and school performance
Taylor-Robinson DC, Maayan N, Soares-Weiser K, Donegan S, Garner P. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2015; Issue 7. Art. No.: CD000371.
Summary of this review 
Deworming and adjuvant interventions for improving the developmental health and well-
being of children in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Welch VA. Awasthi S, Cumberbatch C, Fletcher R, McGown J, Merritt K et al. Campbell Systematic Reviews.
2016;12.
Related Cochrane reviews
Public health deworming programmes for soil‐transmitted helminths in children living in
endemic areas
Taylor‐Robinson DC, Maayan N, Donegan S, Chaplin M, Garner P. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2019; Issue 9. Art. No.: CD000371.
Other related systematic reviews
Differential effect of mass deworming and targeted deworming for soil-transmitted helminth
control in children: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Clarke NE, Clements AC A, Doi SA, Wang D, Campbell SJ, Gray D, Nery SV. Lancet. 2017;389(10066):287-297.

[page 4]
A review and meta-analysis of the impact of intestinal worms on child growth and nutrition.
Hall A, Hewitt G, Tuffrey V, De Silva N. Maternal and Child Nutrition. 2008, 4:118–236.
Mass deworming to improve developmental health and wellbeing of children in low-income
and middle-income countries: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
Welch VA, Ghogomu E, Hossain A, Awasthi S, Bhutta ZA, Cumberbatch C, et al. The Lancet Global Health.
2017;5:e40-e50.
Impact of hookworm infection and deworming on anaemia in non-pregnant populations: a
systematic review.
Smith JL, Brooker S. Tropical Medicine & International Health. 2010; 15:776–795.
Does mass deworming affect child nutrition? Meta-analysis, cost-effectiveness, and statistical
power
Croke K, Hamory Hicks J, Hsu E, Kremer M, Miguel E. Policy Research working paper; no. WPS 7921.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group; 2016.
Learn More 
Cost-effectivenеss
Systematic reviews
Cost and cost-effectiveness of soil-transmitted helminth treatment programmes: systematic
review and research needs
Turner HC, Truscott JE, Hollingsworth TD, Bettis AA, Brooker SJ, Anderson RM. Parasit Vectors. 2015; 8:355.
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Does mass deworming affect child nutrition? Meta-analysis, cost-effectiveness, and statistical
power
Croke K, Hamory Hicks J, Hsu E, Kremer M, Miguel E. Policy Research working paper; no. WPS 7921.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group; 2016.
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.

[page 5]
The costs and cost-effectiveness of mass treatment for intestinal nematode worm infections
using different treatment thresholds
Hall A, Horton S, de Silva N. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2009; 3(3):e402.
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of albendazole in improving nutritional status of pre-
school children in urban slums
Awasthi S, Pande VK, Fletcher RH. Indian Pediatr. 2000; 37(1):19-29.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 6]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO