

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Deworming in non-
pregnant adolescent
girls and women of
reproductive age
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
internal bleeding which can lead to loss of iron and anaemia;
intestinal inflammation and obstruction;
Soil-transmitted helminth infections are among the most common infections in
humans, caused by a group of parasites commonly referred to as worms, including
roundworms, whipworms and hookworms. Those living in poverty are most vulnerable
to infection which can impair nutritional status by causing:

[page 2]
diarrhoea; and
impairment of nutrient intake, digestion and absorption.
Evidence shows that preventive chemotherapy, or the periodic large-scale
administration of anthelminthic medicines to populations at risk, can dramatically
reduce the burden of worms caused by soil-transmitted helminth infections.
Preventive chemotherapy is an important part of a comprehensive package to eliminate
morbidity due to soil-transmitted helminths in at-risk populations. However, long-term
solutions to soil-transmitted helminth infections will need to address many factors,
including improvements in water, sanitation and hygiene.
WHO Recommendations
Preventive chemotherapy (deworming), using annual or biannuala single-dose
albendazole (400 mg) or mebendazole (500 mg), is recommended as a public health
intervention for all non-pregnant adolescent girls and women of reproductive age living
in areas where the baseline prevalence of any soil-transmitted helminth infection is 20%
or more among adolescent girls and women of reproductive age, in order to reduce the
worm burden of soil-transmitted helminths.
a Biannual administration is recommended where the baseline prevalence is more than
50%.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Preventive chemotherapy to control soil-transmitted helminth
infections in at-risk population groups
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines

[page 3]
Effect of administration of antihelminthics for soil-transmitted helminths during pregnancy
Salam RA, Haider BA, Humayun Q, Bhutta ZA.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 6. Art.
No.: CD005547.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Systematic reviews
Cost and cost-effectiveness of soil-transmitted helminth treatment programmes: systematic
review and research needs
Turner HC, Truscott JE, Hollingsworth TD, Bettis AA, Brooker SJ, Anderson RM. Parasit Vectors. 2015; 8:355.
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Weekly iron-folic acid supplementation with regular deworming is cost-effective in preventing
anaemia in women of reproductive age in Vietnam
Casey GJ, Sartori D, Horton SE, Phuc TQ, Phu LB, Thach DT, et al. PLoS One. 2011; 6(9):e23723.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us


[page 4]
Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO