

[page 1]
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health
NCCIH Clinical Digest
An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know

[page 2]
for health professionals
Dietary Supplements for Eye
Conditions: What the Science Says
July 2024
Clinical Guidelines, Scientific Literature, Info for Patients:

[page 3]
Dietary Supplements for Eye Conditions
Age-Related Macular
Degeneration (AMD)
Many people turn to dietary
supplements to prevent or slow the
progression of certain eye
diseases, such as age-related
macular degeneration (AMD),
cataract, dry eye disease, and
glaucoma. There is evidence that a
combination of vitamins E and C, beta-carotene, and zinc (known as
the AREDS formulation) may reduce the risk of developing advanced
AMD. There is also some limited evidence that for less well-nourished
populations, the carotenoids lutein/zeaxanthin may be associated with
a reduction in progression to cataract surgery; however, whether
supplementation would be beneficial for this population requires
further study. Current data do not support dietary supplementation
with vitamins A, C, and E for glaucoma or the use of cannabinoids for
glaucoma treatment. 
What Does the Research Show?
The available data on efficacy of dietary supplements for delaying the
progression of or reducing the risk of developing AMD consist of
several randomized controlled trials and systematic reviews.
A 2023 Cochrane review of 26 studies conducted in the United
States, Europe, China, and Australia and involving a total of
11,952 people aged 65 to 75 years found moderate-certainty
evidence suggesting that antioxidant vitamin and mineral
supplementation (AREDS: vitamin C, E, beta-carotene, and
zinc) probably slows progression to late AMD. The reviewers
noted that people with intermediate AMD have a higher chance of
benefiting from antioxidant supplements because their risk of
progression is higher than people with early AMD. Although low-
certainty evidence suggested little effect with lutein/zeaxanthin
alone compared with placebo, subgroup analyses from a single
large American study suggests that lutein/zeaxanthin may be a
suitable replacement for the beta-carotene used in the original
AREDS formula.

[page 4]
A 2022 multicenter epidemiologic follow-up study of the AREDS2
clinical trial involving 3,882 participants found that
lutein/zeaxanthin was a suitable replacement for beta carotene in
AREDS2 supplements. Beta carotene usage nearly doubled the
risk of lung cancer in those who were current smokers, and former
smokers had higher rates of developing of lung cancer than
nonsmokers; however, there was no statistically significant
increased risk with lutein/zeaxanthin When compared with beta
carotene, lutein/zeaxanthin had a potential beneficial association
with late AMD progression. 
A 2012 randomized controlled trial of 14,236 male physicians
aged 50 years and older concluded that long-term (8 years) use of
vitamin E and/or vitamin C has no appreciable beneficial or
harmful effect on risk of incident diagnosis of AMD.
A 2013 Cochrane review of two small randomized controlled trials
involving a total of 119 participants concluded that current
available research has not yet answered the question as to
whether Ginkgo biloba supplements benefit people with AMD.
A 2021 post hoc analysis of two controlled clinical trial cohorts—
Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) and AREDS2—involving
a total of 14,135 eyes, found that higher dietary intake of multiple
nutrients, including minerals, vitamins, and carotenoids, is
associated with decreased risk of progression to late AMD.  
A 2015 Cochrane systematic review of two randomized controlled
trials involving 2,343 participants found that omega-3 fatty acid
supplementation in people with AMD for periods up to 5 years
does not reduce the risk of progression to advanced AMD or the
development of moderate-to-severe visual loss.
A 2021 review found that there are some data from experimental
studies in animals that Fructus lycii (F. lycii), a “berry-type” fruit of
the plant Lycium barbarum, may show promise in preventing or
delaying the onset of retinal diseases such as AMD. However, the
reviewers noted that there is a paucity of data from human trials
and that there are a number of concerns that need to be
addressed before F. lycii establishes its place in the clinical
management of retinal diseases. 
Safety
Vitamin C has low toxicity and is not believed to cause serious
adverse effects at high intakes. The most common complaints are
diarrhea, nausea, abdominal cramps, and other gastrointestinal

[page 5]
disturbances due to the osmotic effect of unabsorbed vitamin C in
the gastrointestinal tract.
Research has not found any adverse effects from consuming
vitamin E in food. However, high doses of alpha-tocopherol
supplements can cause hemorrhage and interrupt blood
coagulation in animals, and in vitro data suggest that high doses
inhibit platelet aggregation. Two meta-analyses of randomized
trials have also raised questions about the safety of large doses of
vitamin E, including doses lower than the Tolerable Upper Intake
Level (UL). These meta-analyses linked supplementation to small
but statistically significant increases in all-cause mortality. Results
from the large SELECT trial show that vitamin E supplements (400
IU/day) may harm adult men in the general population by
increasing their risk of prostate cancer.
Use of beta-carotene has been linked to an increased risk of lung
cancer in current and former smokers. In nonsmokers, however,
large amounts of beta-carotene and other provitamin A
carotenoids are not associated with major adverse effects. Even
large supplemental doses (20–30 mg/day) of beta-carotene or
diets with high levels of carotenoid-rich food for long periods are
not associated with toxicity. The most significant effect of long-
term, excess beta-carotene is carotenodermia, a harmless
condition in which the skin becomes yellow-orange. Lutein and
zeaxanthin appear to be safe regardless of smoking status.
For many healthy adults, Ginkgo biloba appears to be safe when
taken orally in moderate amounts. Adverse effects may include
headache, gastrointestinal upset, and allergic skin reactions. In a
2013 study, rodents given ginkgo had an increased risk of
developing liver and thyroid cancer at the end of the 2-year tests.
Raw or roasted ginkgo seeds can be poisonous.
Omega-3 fatty acid supplements usually do not have adverse
effects. When side effects do occur, they typically consist of minor
gastrointestinal symptoms. 
F. lycii is generally considered to be a safe supplement when
taken in the appropriate dosage. Allergic reactions to F. lycii are
rare; however, a few cases have been reported with symptoms
such as generalized urticaria, toxic hepatitis, and a rare life-
threatening anaphylactic reaction.
Cataract
In the Age-Related Eye Disease Studies (AREDS and AREDS2), neither

[page 6]
omega-3 fatty acids nor lutein/zeaxanthin, when added to the original
AREDS formulation (vitamins E and C, beta-carotene, and zinc), had
any overall effect on the need for cataract surgery. However, when the
participants were ranked into five equal-sized groups according to
their dietary lutein/zeaxanthin intake, supplementation with
lutein/zeaxanthin appeared to make a difference for the group with the
lowest dietary levels. Within that group, lutein/zeaxanthin was
associated with a 32 percent reduction in progression to cataract
surgery.
Although there are some data from observational research that dietary
vitamin B12 supplements may slow or prevent cataract development,
no dietary supplements have been recommended for the treatment of
cataracts.
What Does the Research Show?
The available data on efficacy of dietary supplements for preventing or
slowing the progression of cataracts consist of several randomized
controlled trials, observational studies, and systematic reviews.
A 2012 Cochrane review of 9 randomized controlled trials
involving 117,272 participants aged 35 years or older found no
evidence that antioxidant vitamin supplementation (vitamin C,
vitamin E, or beta-carotene) reduced the risk of cataract, cataract
extraction, or cataract progression or slowed the loss of visual
acuity.
A 2013 randomized controlled trial (Age-Related Eye Disease
Study—AREDS2) of 3,159 participants found that daily
supplementation with lutein/zeaxanthin had no statistically
significant overall effect on rates of cataract surgery or vision loss.
Findings from 2015 observational data (Age-Related Eye Disease
Study—AREDS) of 3,159 participants examining the association
of dietary lutein plus zeaxanthin and B12 vitamins with cataracts
suggest that dietary intake of B12 vitamins may affect the
occurrence of age-related lens opacities. Specifically, the study
showed increased dietary riboflavin and B12 were associated with
less nuclear and cortical lens opacities.
Findings from a 2015 randomized controlled trial of 11,267 men
from the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial
(SELECT) Eye Endpoints Study indicate that long-term daily
supplementation with selenium and/or vitamin E is unlikely to have
a large beneficial effect on age-related cataract.

[page 7]
A 2020 review concluded that in general, clinical trials have not
been able to show convincing therapeutic effects of vitamin C
supplementation on cataract incidence, except in those cases in
which individuals may have had low vitamin C levels at the start of
the trial.
Safety
Vitamin C has low toxicity and is not believed to cause serious
adverse effects at high intakes. The most common complaints are
diarrhea, nausea, abdominal cramps, and other gastrointestinal
disturbances due to the osmotic effect of unabsorbed vitamin C in
the gastrointestinal tract.
Research has not found any adverse effects from consuming
vitamin E in food. However, high doses of alpha-tocopherol
supplements can cause hemorrhage and interrupt blood
coagulation in animals, and in vitro data suggest that high doses
inhibit platelet aggregation. Two meta-analyses of randomized
trials have also raised questions about the safety of large doses of
vitamin E, including doses lower than the Tolerable Upper Intake
Level (UL). These meta-analyses linked supplementation to small
but statistically significant increases in all-cause mortality. Results
from the large SELECT trial show that vitamin E supplements (400
IU/day) may harm adult men in the general population by
increasing their risk of prostate cancer.
Use of beta-carotene has been linked to an increased risk of lung
cancer in current and former smokers. In nonsmokers, however,
large amounts of beta-carotene and other provitamin A
carotenoids are not associated with major adverse effects. Even
large supplemental doses (20–30 mg/day) of beta-carotene or
diets with high levels of carotenoid-rich food for long periods are
not associated with toxicity. The most significant effect of long-
term, excess beta-carotene is carotenodermia, a harmless
condition in which the skin becomes yellow-orange. 
No adverse effects have been associated with excess vitamin
B12 intake from food and supplements in healthy individuals.

[page 8]
Chronically high intakes of the organic and inorganic forms of
selenium have similar effects. Early indicators of excess intake
are a garlic odor in the breath and a metallic taste in the mouth.
The most common clinical signs of chronically high selenium
intakes, or selenosis, are hair and nail loss or brittleness. Other
symptoms include lesions of the skin and nervous system,
nausea, diarrhea, skin rashes, mottled teeth, fatigue, irritability,
and nervous system abnormalities.
Dry Eye Disease
There is some limited evidence suggesting that omega-3 supplements
may have a role in managing dry eye; however, more research is
needed before any firm conclusions can be drawn.
What Does the Research Show?
A 2019 Cochrane review
 of 34 randomized controlled trials
involving more than 4,314 adult participants concluded that long-
chain omega-3 supplements may have a role in managing dry
eye; however, the evidence is currently inconsistent and more
research is needed.
A 2022 randomized clinical trial of 23,523 adults without dry eye
disease found that daily supplementation with 1 g of marine
omega-3 fatty acids for a median of 5.3 years had no significant
effect on the incidence of diagnosed dry eye disease or reported
dry eye disease symptoms.
Safety
Omega-3 fatty acid supplements usually do not have adverse
effects. When side effects do occur, they typically consist of minor
gastrointestinal symptoms. 
Glaucoma
Current data do not support dietary supplementation with vitamins A,
C, and E for glaucoma or the use of cannabinoids as glaucoma
treatment.
What Does the Research Show?
The available data on efficacy of dietary supplements for delaying the
progression of glaucoma consist of several laboratory studies, but only
a few randomized controlled trials and a cross-sectional study.

[page 9]
Findings from a 2013 cross-sectional study involving 2,912
participants aged 40 years and older in the 2005–2006 National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey indicate that neither
supplementary consumption with nor serum levels of vitamins A
and E were found to be associated with glaucoma prevalence.
However, individuals reporting either low vitamin C (≤100 mg/day)
and or high (>900 mg/day) supplementation levels had
significantly lower adjusted odds of being diagnosed with
glaucoma than those reporting no vitamin C supplementation. No
dose-response relationship was demonstrated, and serum levels
of vitamin C did not correlate with glaucoma prevalence. Low-
and high-dose supplementary consumption of vitamin C,
however, was found to be associated with decreased odds of
developing glaucoma. While vitamin C intake, relative to no
vitamin C intake, may be associated with decreased odds of
glaucoma development, findings should be reproducible in further
studies before therapeutic recommendations can be made.
Studies conducted in the 1970s and 1980s showed that cannabis
or substances derived from it could lower pressure in the eye, but
not as effectively as treatments already in use (see NCCIH’s fact
sheet, “Cannabis (Marijuana) and Cannabinoids: What You Need
To Know” for more information). 
A 2006 small crossover trial compared delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC; 5mg), cannabidiol (CBD; 20
mg and 40 mg) oromucosal spray, and placebo with six patients
with ocular hypertension or early primary open angle glaucoma.
The study found an intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering effect of
delta-9-THC, but it was not considered to be clinically relevant.
CBD did not reduce IOP.     
A 2020 crossover randomized trial involving 57 participants with
glaucoma found that nicotinamide (vitamin B3) supplementation
may improve inner retinal function in glaucoma. Additional studies
are underway to determine the effects of long-term nicotinamide
supplementation.
Safety
Vitamin C has low toxicity and is not believed to cause serious
adverse effects at high intakes. The most common complaints are
diarrhea, nausea, abdominal cramps, and other gastrointestinal
disturbances due to the osmotic effect of unabsorbed vitamin C in
the gastrointestinal tract.

[page 10]
Research has not found any adverse effects from consuming
vitamin E in food. However, high doses of alpha-tocopherol
supplements can cause hemorrhage and interrupt blood
coagulation in animals, and in vitro data suggest that high doses
inhibit platelet aggregation. Two meta-analyses of randomized
trials have also raised questions about the safety of large doses of
vitamin E, including doses lower than the Tolerable Upper Intake
Level (UL). These meta-analyses linked supplementation to small
but statistically significant increases in all-cause mortality. Results
from the large SELECT trial show that vitamin E supplements (400
IU/day) may harm adult men in the general population by
increasing their risk of prostate cancer.
There is risk of adverse events with cannabinoid use, including
asthenia, balance problems, confusion, dizziness, disorientation,
diarrhea, euphoria, drowsiness, dry mouth, fatigue, hallucination,
nausea, somnolence, and vomiting. For additional information on
safety, see NCCIH’s fact sheet, “Cannabis (Marijuana) and
Cannabinoids: What You Need To Know.”
References
Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) Research Group, Chew EY,
SanGiovanni JP, et al. Lutein/zeaxanthin for the treatment of age-
related cataract: AREDS2 randomized trial report n. 4. JAMA
Ophthalmology. 2013;131(7):843-850.
Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) Research Group, Chew EY,
Clemons TE, et al. Secondary analyses of the effects of
lutein/zeaxanthin on age-related macular degeneration
progression: AREDS2 report no. 3. JAMA
Ophthalmology. 2014;132(2):142-149.
Agrón E, Mares J, Clemons TE, et al. Dietary nutrient intake and
progression to late age-related macular degeneration in the Age-
Related Eye Disease Studies 1 and 2. Ophthalmology.
2021;128(3):425-442.
Chew EY, Clemons TE, Agrón E, et al. Long-term outcomes of adding
lutein/zeaxanthin and ω-3 fatty acids to the AREDS supplements
on age-related macular degeneration progression: AREDS2
Report 28. JAMA Ophthalmology. 2022;140(7):692-698.

[page 11]
Christen WG, Cook NR, Manson JE, et al. Efficacy of marine ω-3 fatty
acid supplementation vs placebo in reducing incidence of dry eye
disease in healthy US adults: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Ophthalmology. 2022;140(7):707-714.
Christen WG, Glynn RJ, Gaziano JM, et al. Age-related cataract in men
in the selenium and vitamin E cancer prevention trial eye endpoint
study: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Ophthalmology. 2015;133(1):17-24.
Christen WG, Glynn RJ, Sesso HD, et al. Vitamins E and C and medical
record-confirmed age-related macular degeneration in a
randomized trial of male
physicians. Ophthalmology. 2012;119(8):1642-1649.
Downie LE, Ng SM, Lindsley KB, Akpek EK. Omega-3 and omega-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids for dry eye disease. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews.2019;12(12):CD011016.
Evans JR, Lawrenson JG. Antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements
for slowing the progression of age-related macular degeneration.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2023;9(9):CD000254. 
Evans JR. Ginkgo biloba extract for age-related macular
degeneration. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2013;
(1):CD001775.
Glaser TS, Doss LE, Shih G, et al. The association of dietary lutein plus
zeaxanthin and B vitamins with cataracts in the Age-Related Eye
Disease Study: AREDS report no.
37. Ophthalmology. 2015;122(7):1471-1479.
Hui F, Tang J, Williams PA, et al. Improvement in inner retinal function in
glaucoma with nicotinamide (vitamin B3) supplementation: a
crossover randomized clinical trial. Clinical and Experimental
Ophthalmology. 2020;48(7):903-914.
Lawrenson JG, Evans JR. Omega-3 fatty acids for preventing or
slowing the progression of age-related macular
degeneration. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2015;
(4):CD10015.

[page 12]
Lim JC, Caballero Arredondo M, Braakhuis AJ, et al. Vitamin C and the
lens: new insights into delaying the onset of cataract. Nutrients.
2020;12(10):3142.
Mathew MC, Ervin A-M, Tao J, et al. Antioxidant vitamin
supplementation for preventing and slowing the progression of
age-related cataract. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2012;(6):CD004567.
Neelam K, Dey S, Sim R, et al. Fructus lycii: a natural dietary
supplement for amelioration of retinal diseases. Nutrients.
2021;13(1):246.
Tomida I, Azuara-Blanco A, House H, et al. Effect of sublingual
application of cannabinoids on intraocular pressure: a pilot
study. Journal of Glaucoma. 2006;15(5):349-353.
Wang SY, Singh K, Lin SC. Glaucoma and vitamins A, C, and E
supplement intake and serum levels in a population-based sample
of the United States. Eye (London). 2013;27(4):487-494.
NCCIH Clinical Digest is a service of the National Center for
Complementary and Integrative Health, NIH, DHHS. NCCIH
Clinical Digest, a monthly e-newsletter, offers evidence-based
information on complementary health approaches, including
scientific literature searches, summaries of NCCIH-funded
research, fact sheets for patients, and more.
The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health is
dedicated to exploring complementary health products and
practices in the context of rigorous science, training
complementary health researchers, and disseminating
authoritative information to the public and professionals. For
additional information, call NCCIH’s Clearinghouse toll-free at 1-
888-644-6226, or visit the NCCIH website at nccih.nih.gov.
NCCIH is 1 of 27 institutes and centers at the National Institutes
of Health, the Federal focal point for medical research in the
United States.
Copyright
Content is in the public domain and may be reprinted, except if
marked as copyrighted (©). Please credit the National Center for
Complementary and Integrative Health as the source. All

[page 13]
copyrighted material is the property of its respective owners and
may not be reprinted without their permission.