

[page 1]
What are weight-loss dietary supplements and 
what do they do?
The proven ways to lose weight are eating healthful foods, cutting calories, and 
being physically active. But making these lifestyle changes isn’t easy, so you might 
wonder if taking a dietary supplement that’s promoted for weight loss might help.
This fact sheet describes what’s known about the safety and effectiveness of many 
ingredients that are commonly used in weight-loss dietary supplements. Sellers of 
these supplements might claim that their products help you lose weight by blocking 
the absorption of fat or carbohydrates, curbing your appetite, or speeding up your 
metabolism. But there’s little scientific evidence that weight-loss supplements work. 
Many are expensive, some can interact or interfere with medications, and a few might 
be harmful.
If you’re thinking about taking a dietary supplement to lose weight, talk with your 
healthcare provider. This is especially important if you have high blood pressure, 
diabetes, heart disease, liver disease, or other medical conditions.
What are the ingredients in weight-loss 
dietary supplements?
Weight-loss supplements contain many ingredients—like herbs, fiber, and minerals—
in different amounts and in many combinations. Sold in forms such as capsules, 
tablets, liquids, and powders, some products have dozens of ingredients. 
Common ingredients in weight-loss supplements are described below in alphabetical 
order. You’ll learn what’s known about whether each ingredient works and is safe. 
Figuring out whether these ingredients really help you lose weight safely is 
complicated, though. Most products contain more than one ingredient, and 
ingredients can work differently when they’re mixed together.
You might be surprised to learn that makers of weight-loss supplements rarely carry 
out studies in people to find out whether their product works and is safe. And when 
studies are done, they usually involve only small numbers of people who take the 
supplement for just a few weeks or months. To know whether a weight-loss 
supplement can help people lose weight safely and keep it off, larger groups of people 
need to be studied for a longer time. 
The next pages provide information on common ingredients found 
in weight-loss dietary supplements.
Dietary Supplements for Weight Loss 
Fact Sheet for Consumers
If you’re thinking about taking 
a dietary supplement to lose 
weight, talk with your health 
care provider.

[page 2]
African mango
African mango seed extract is claimed to curb the formation 
of fat tissue.
Does it work? 
African mango might help you lose a very small amount 
of weight.
Is it safe? 
African mango seems to be safe, but its safety hasn’t been 
well studied. It can cause headache, sleeping problems, 
flatulence, and gas.
Beta-glucans
Beta-glucans are soluble dietary 
fibers in bacteria, yeasts, fungi, 
oats, and barley. They might 
slow down the time it takes 
for food to travel through your 
digestive system, making you 
feel fuller.
Does it work? 
Beta-glucans don’t seem to have any effect on body weight.
Is it safe? 
Beta-glucans seem to be safe (at up to 10 grams [g] a day for 
12 weeks). They can cause flatulence. 
Bitter orange
Bitter orange contains 
synephrine (a stimulant). 
It’s claimed to burn calories, 
increase fat breakdown, and 
decrease appetite. Products 
with bitter orange usually also 
contain caffeine and other 
ingredients. Bitter orange is in some weight loss dietary 
supplements that used to contain ephedra, another stimulant-
containing herb that was banned from the U.S. market in 
2004 (see the section on Ephedra).
Does it work? 
Bitter orange might slightly increase the number of calories 
you burn. It might also reduce your appetite a little, but 
whether it can help you lose weight is unknown.
Is it safe? 
Bitter orange might not be safe. Supplements with bitter 
orange can cause chest pain, anxiety, headache, muscle and 
bone pain, a faster heart rate, and higher blood pressure. 
Caffeine 
Caffeine is a stimulant that can 
make you more alert, give you 
a boost of energy, burn calories, 
and increase fat breakdown. Of­
ten added to weight-loss dietary 
supplements, caffeine is found 
naturally in tea, guarana, kola 
(cola) nut, yerba mate, and other herbs. The labels of supple­
ments that contain caffeine don’t always list it, so you might 
not know if a supplement has caffeine.
Does it work? 
Weight-loss dietary supplements with caffeine might help 
you lose a little weight or gain less weight over time. But when 
you use caffeine regularly, you become tolerant of it. This 
tolerance might lessen any effect of caffeine on body weight 
over time.
Is it safe? 
Caffeine is safe for most adults at doses up to 400‒500 
milligrams (mg) a day. But it can make you feel nervous, 
jittery, and shaky. It can also affect your sleep. At higher 
doses, it can cause nausea, vomiting, rapid heartbeat, and 
seizures. Combining caffeine with other stimulant ingredients 
can increase caffeine’s effects.
Calcium
Calcium is a mineral you need 
for healthy bones, muscles, 
nerves, blood vessels, and many 
of your body’s functions. 
It’s claimed to burn fat and 
decrease fat absorption.
Does it work? 
Calcium—either from food or in weight-loss dietary 
supplements—probably doesn’t help you lose weight or 
prevent weight gain.
Is it safe? 
Calcium is safe at the recommended amounts of 1,000 to 
1,200 mg a day for adults. Too much calcium (more than 
2,000–2,500 mg a day) can cause constipation and decrease 
your body’s absorption of iron and zinc. Also, too much 
calcium from supplements (but not foods) might increase 
your risk of kidney stones.
2 • WEIGHT-LOSS SUPPLEMENTS FACT SHEET FOR CONSUMERS

[page 3]
Capsaicin
Capsaicin comes from chili pep­
pers and makes them taste hot. 
It’s claimed to help burn fat and 
calories and to help you feel full 
and eat less. 
Does it work? 
Capsaicin hasn’t been studied 
enough to know if it will help you lose weight.
Is it safe? 
Capsaicin is safe (at up to 33 mg a day for 4 weeks or 4 mg 
a day for 12 weeks), but it can cause stomach pain, burning 
sensations, nausea, and bloating.
Carnitine
Your body makes carnitine, and it’s also found in meat, fish, 
poultry, milk, and dairy products. In your cells, it helps break 
down fats. 
Does it work? 
Carnitine supplements might help you lose a small amount 
of weight.
Is it safe? 
Carnitine supplements seem to be safe (at up to 2 g a day for 1 
year or 4 g a day for 56 days). They can cause nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and a fishy body odor.
Chitosan
Chitosan comes from the shells 
of crabs, shrimp, and lobsters. 
It’s claimed to bind fat in the 
digestive tract so that your body 
can’t absorb it. 
Does it work? 
Chitosan binds only a tiny 
amount of fat, not enough to help you lose much weight.
Is it safe? 
Chitosan seems to be safe (at up to 15 g a day for 6 months). 
But it can cause flatulence, bloating, mild nausea, constipa­
tion, indigestion, and heartburn. If you’re allergic to shellfish, 
you could have an allergic reaction to chitosan.
Chromium
Chromium is a mineral that you need to regulate your blood 
sugar levels. It’s claimed to increase muscle mass and fat loss 
and decrease appetite and food intake.
Does it work? 
Chromium might help you lose a very small amount of weight 
and body fat.
Is it safe? 
Chromium in food and supplements is safe at recommended 
amounts, which range from 20 to 45 micrograms a day 
for adults. In larger amounts, chromium can cause watery 
stools, headache, weakness, nausea, vomiting, constipation, 
dizziness, and hives.
Coleus forskohlii 
Coleus forskohlii is a plant that 
grows in India, Thailand, and 
other subtropical areas. For­
skolin, made from the plant’s 
roots, is claimed to help you 
lose weight by decreasing your 
appetite and increasing the 
breakdown of fat in your body.
Does it work? 
Forskolin hasn’t been studied much. But so far, it doesn’t seem 
to have any effect on body weight or appetite.
Is it safe? 
Forskolin seems to be safe (at 500 mg a day for 12 weeks), 
but it hasn’t been well studied. It can cause frequent bowel 
movements and loose stools.
Conjugated linoleic 
acid (CLA)
CLA is a fat found mainly 
in dairy products and beef. 
It’s claimed to reduce your 
body fat.
Does it work? 
CLA may help you lose a very 
small amount of weight and body fat.
Is it safe? 
CLA seems to be safe (at up to 6 g a day for 1 year). It can 
cause an upset stomach, constipation, diarrhea, loose stools, 
and indigestion.
3 • WEIGHT-LOSS SUPPLEMENTS FACT SHEET FOR CONSUMERS

[page 4]
Fucoxanthin
Fucoxanthin comes from brown 
seaweed and other algae. It’s 
claimed to help with weight loss 
by burning calories and decreas­
ing fat.
Does it work? 
Fucoxanthin hasn’t been 
studied enough to know if it will help you lose weight. Only 
one study in people included fucoxanthin (the other studies 
were in animals).
Is it safe? 
Fucoxanthin seems to be safe (at 2.4 mg a day for 16 weeks), 
but it hasn’t been studied enough to know for sure.
Garcinia cambogia
Garcinia cambogia is a tree that 
grows throughout Asia, Africa, 
and the Polynesian islands. 
Hydroxycitric acid in the fruit is 
claimed to decrease the number 
of new fat cells your body 
makes, suppress your appetite 
and thus reduce the amount of food you eat, and limit the 
amount of weight you gain.
Does it work? 
Garcinia cambogia has little to no effect on weight loss.
Is it safe? 
Garcinia cambogia seems to be fairly safe. But it can cause 
headache, nausea, and symptoms in the upper respiratory tract, 
stomach, and intestines. 
Glucomannan 
Glucomannan is a soluble dietary fiber from the root of the 
konjac plant. It’s claimed to absorb water in the gut to help 
you feel full.
Does it work? 
Glucomannan has little to no effect on weight loss. But it 
might help lower total cholesterol, LDL (“bad”) cholesterol, 
triglycerides, and blood sugar levels.
Is it safe? 
Most forms of glucomannan seem to be safe (at up to 15.1 g 
a day for several weeks in a powder or capsule form). It can 
cause loose stools, flatulence, diarrhea, constipation, and 
abdominal discomfort.
Green coffee bean extract
Green coffee beans are unroasted coffee beans. Green coffee 
bean extract is claimed to decrease fat accumulation and help 
convert blood sugar into energy that your cells can use.
Does it work? 
Green coffee bean extract might help you lose a small amount 
of weight.
Is it safe? 
Green coffee bean extract seems to be safe (at up to 200 mg a 
day for 12 weeks). It might cause headache and urinary tract 
infections. Green coffee beans contain the stimulant caffeine, 
which can cause problems at high doses or when it’s combined 
with other stimulants (see the section on Caffeine).
Green tea and 
green tea extract
Green tea (also called Camellia 
sinensis) is a common 
beverage all over the world. 
Green tea and green tea extract 
in some weight-loss supplements 
are claimed to reduce body 
weight by increasing the calories your body burns, breaking 
down fat cells, and decreasing fat absorption and the amount 
of new fat your body makes.
Does it work? 
Green tea might help you lose a small amount of weight.
Is it safe? 
Drinking green tea is safe, but taking green tea extract might 
not be. Green tea extract can cause constipation, abdominal 
discomfort, nausea, and increased blood pressure. In some 
people, it has been linked to liver damage.
Guar gum
Guar gum is a soluble dietary fiber in some dietary supple­
ments and food products. It’s claimed to make you feel full, 
lower your appetite, and decrease the amount of food you eat. 
Does it work? 
Guar gum probably doesn’t help you lose weight.
Is it safe? 
Guar gum seems to be safe (at up to 30 g a day for 6 months) 
when it is taken with enough fluid. But it can cause abdominal 
pain, flatulence, diarrhea, nausea, and cramps.
Guarana (see the section on Caffeine)
4 • WEIGHT-LOSS SUPPLEMENTS FACT SHEET FOR CONSUMERS

[page 5]
Hoodia 
Hoodia is a plant from southern 
Africa, where it’s used as an ap­
petite suppressant.
Does it work? 
There hasn’t been much research 
on hoodia, but it probably won’t 
help you eat less or lose weight. 
Analyses showed that some “hoodia” supplements sold in the 
past contained very little hoodia or none at all. It’s not known 
whether this is true of hoodia supplements sold today.
Is it safe? 
Hoodia might not be safe. It can cause rapid heart rate, in­
creased blood pressure, headache, dizziness, nausea, 
and vomiting.
Kola (or cola) nut (see the section on Caffeine)
Mate (see the section on Caffeine)
Probiotics
Probiotics are microorganisms in foods, such as some yogurts, 
and some dietary supplements that help maintain or restore 
beneficial bacteria in your digestive tract.
Does it work? 
It’s unclear whether probiotic supplements have any effect on 
weight or body fat. 
Is it safe? 
Probiotics are safe in healthy people but may cause gas or other 
gastrointestinal problems.
Pyruvate
Pyruvate is naturally present in your body. Pyruvate in weight-
loss supplements is claimed to increase fat breakdown, reduce 
body weight and body fat, and improve exercise performance.
Does it work? 
Pyruvate in supplements might help you lose a small amount 
of weight. 
Is it safe? 
Pyruvate seems to be safe (at up to 30 g a day for 6 weeks). It 
can cause diarrhea, gas, bloating, and rumbling noises in the 
intestines due to gas.


Raspberry ketone
Raspberry ketone, found in red 
raspberries, is claimed to be a 
“fat burner.”  
Does it work? 
Raspberry ketone has only been 
studied as a weight-loss aid in 
combination with other ingredi­
ents and not alone. Its effects on body weight are unknown.
Is it safe? 
Raspberry ketone hasn’t been studied enough to tell if it’s safe.
Vitamin D
Your body needs vitamin D for good health and strong bones. 
People who are obese tend to have lower levels of vitamin D, 
but there is no known reason why taking vitamin D would 
help people lose weight.  
Does it work? 
Vitamin D doesn’t help you lose weight.
Is it safe? 
Vitamin D from foods and dietary supplements is safe at the 
recommended amounts of 600‒800 IU a day for adults. Too 
much vitamin D (more than 4,000 IU a day) can be toxic and 
cause nausea, vomiting, poor appetite, constipation, weak­
ness, and irregular heartbeat.
White kidney bean/
bean pod
White kidney bean or bean pod 
(also called Phaseolus vulgaris) 
is a legume grown around the 
world. An extract of this bean is 
claimed to block the absorption 
of carbohydrates and suppress 
your appetite.
Does it work? 
Phaseolus vulgaris extract might help you lose a small amount 
of weight and body fat.
Is it safe? 
Phaseolus vulgaris seems to be safe (at up to 3,000 mg a day for 
12 weeks). But it might cause headaches, soft stools, flatulence, 
and constipation.
Yerba mate (see the section on Caffeine)
5 • WEIGHT-LOSS SUPPLEMENTS FACT SHEET FOR CONSUMERS

[page 6]
Yohimbe
Yohimbe is a West African tree. 
Yohimbe, which contains a 
compound called yohimbine, 
is an ingredient found in some 
dietary supplements claiming 
to increase weight loss, improve 
libido, increase muscle mass, or 
treat male sexual dysfunction.
Does it work? 
Yohimbe doesn’t help you lose weight.
Is it safe? 
Yohimbe might not be safe (especially at yohimbine doses of 
20 mg or higher). Use it only with guidance from your health­
care provider because the side effects can be severe. Yohimbe 
can cause headaches, high blood pressure, anxiety, agitation, 
rapid heartbeat, heart attack, heart failure, and death.

Ephedra, an ingredient banned from 
dietary supplements?
Ephedra (also called má huáng) is a plant containing sub­
stances that can stimulate your nervous system, increase the 
amount of energy you burn, increase weight loss, and suppress 
your appetite. In the 1990s, ephedra was a popular ingredient 
in dietary supplements sold for weight loss and to enhance 
athletic performance. In 2004, the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) banned ephedra in dietary supple­
ments, concluding that it isn’t safe. Ephedra can cause nausea, 
vomiting, anxiety, mood changes, high blood pressure, 
abnormal heartbeat, stroke, seizures, heart attack, and death.
How are weight-loss dietary supplements 
regulated?
The FDA is the federal agency that oversees dietary 
supplements in the United States. Unlike over-the-counter 
and prescription drugs—which must be approved by the 
FDA before they can be sold—dietary supplements don’t 
require review or approval by the FDA before they are put 
on the market. Also, manufacturers don’t have to provide 
evidence to the FDA that their products are safe or effective 
before selling these products. 
When the FDA finds an unsafe dietary supplement, it can 
remove the supplement from the market or ask the supplement 
maker to recall it. The FDA and the Federal Trade Commission 
can also take enforcement action against companies that 
make false weight-loss claims about their supplements; add 
pharmaceutical drugs to their supplements; or claim that their 
supplements can diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent a disease.
For more information about dietary supplement regulations, 
see the Office of Dietary Supplements publication, Dietary 
Supplements: What You Need to Know. 
Can weight-loss dietary supplements 
be harmful? 
Weight-loss supplements, like all dietary supplements, can 
have harmful side effects and might interact with prescription 
and over-the-counter medications. Many weight-loss 
supplements have ingredients that haven’t been tested in 
combination with one another, and their combined effects are 
unknown. 
6 • WEIGHT-LOSS SUPPLEMENTS FACT SHEET FOR CONSUMERS

[page 7]
For more information on this and other supplements, please visit our 
Web site at: http://ods.od.nih.gov or e-mail us at: ods@nih.gov
Updated: June 20, 2019
Tell your healthcare providers about any weight-loss 
supplements or other supplements you take. This information 
will help them work with you to prevent supplement-drug 
interactions, harmful side effects, and other risks..
Fraudulent and adulterated products
Be very cautious when you see weight-loss supplements with 
tempting claims, such as “magic diet pill,” “melt away fat,” and 
“lose weight without diet or exercise.” If the claim sounds too 
good to be true, it probably is. These products might not help 
you lose weight—and they could be dangerous.
Weight-loss products marketed as dietary supplements are 
sometimes adulterated with prescription drugs or controlled 
substances. These ingredients won’t be listed on the product 
label, and they could harm you. The FDA puts out public 
notifications about tainted weight-loss products.
Interactions with medications
Like most dietary supplements, some weight-loss supplements 
can interact or interfere with other medicines or supplements 
you take. If you take dietary supplements and medications on 
a regular basis, be sure to talk about this with your healthcare 
provider.
Choosing a Sensible Approach to Weight Loss 
Weight-loss supplements can be expensive, and they might not 
work. The best way to lose weight and keep it off is to follow 
a healthy eating plan, reduce calories, and exercise regularly 
under the guidance of your healthcare provider. 
As a bonus, lifestyle changes that help you lose weight might 
also improve your mood and energy level and lower your risk 
of heart disease, diabetes, and some types of cancer. 
Where can I find out more?
For general information on weight-loss 
dietary supplements:
• Office of Dietary Supplements Health Professional Fact 
Sheet on Weight-Loss Dietary Supplements
• Weighing the Claims in Diet Ads, Federal Trade Commission
For publications about weight control, obesity, 
physical activity, and nutrition:
• The Weight-control Information Network, National Institute 
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH
• Weight Control, MedlinePlus, NIH
For more advice on buying dietary supplements:
• Office of Dietary Supplements Frequently Asked Questions:
Which brand(s) of dietary supplements should I purchase?
For information about building a healthy diet:
• Dietary Guidelines for Americans
• MyPlate
Disclaimer
This fact sheet by the Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) 
provides information that should not take the place of medical 
advice. We encourage you to talk to your healthcare provid­
ers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your 
interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and 
what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this 
publication of a specific product or service, or recommenda­
tion from an organization or professional society, does not 
represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or 
expert advice.
7 • WEIGHT-LOSS SUPPLEMENTS FACT SHEET FOR CONSUMERS