

[page 1]
What are weight-loss dietary supplements and what do they
do?
The proven ways to lose weight are eating healthful foods, cutting calories, and being physically
active. However, making these lifestyle changes isn’t easy, so you might wonder if taking a dietary
supplement that’s promoted for weight loss might help.
This fact sheet describes what’s known about the safety and effectiveness of many ingredients that
are commonly used in weight-loss dietary supplements. Sellers of these supplements might claim
that their products help you lose weight by blocking the absorption of fat or carbohydrates, curbing
your appetite, or speeding up your metabolism. However, there’s little scientific evidence that
weight-loss supplements work. Many are expensive, some can interact or interfere with
medications, and a few might be harmful.
If you’re thinking about taking a dietary supplement to lose weight, talk with your health care
provider. This is especially important if you have high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease, liver
disease, or other medical conditions.
What are the ingredients in weight-loss dietary supplements?
Weight-loss supplements contain many ingredients—like herbs, fiber, and minerals—in different
amounts and in many combinations. Sold in forms such as capsules, tablets, liquids, and powders,
some products have dozens of ingredients.
Common ingredients in weight-loss supplements are described below in alphabetical order. You’ll
learn what’s known about whether each ingredient works and is safe. Figuring out whether these
ingredients really help you lose weight safely is complicated, though. Most products contain more
than one ingredient, and ingredients can work differently when they’re mixed together.
You might be surprised to learn that makers of weight-loss supplements rarely carry out studies in
people to find out whether their product works and is safe. And when studies are done, they usually
involve only small numbers of people who take the supplement for just a few weeks or months. To
know whether a weight-loss supplement can help people lose weight safely and keep it off, larger
groups of people need to be studied for a longer time.
Common ingredients in weight-loss dietary supplements
African mango
African mango seed extract is
Does it work?
African mango might help you
Is it safe?
African mango seems to be
safe, but its safety hasn’t been
Expand All
Dietary Supplements for Weight Loss
Fact Sheet for Consumers

[page 2]
claimed to curb the formation
of fat tissue.
lose a very small amount of
weight.
well studied. It can cause
headache, sleeping problems,
flatulence, and gas.
Beta-glucans
Beta-glucans are soluble
dietary fibers in bacteria,
yeasts, fungi, oats, and barley.
They might slow down the time
it takes for food to travel
through your digestive system,
making you feel fuller.
Does it work?
Beta-glucans don’t seem to
have any effect on body
weight.
Is it safe?
Beta-glucans seem to be safe
(at up to 10 grams [g] a day for
12 weeks). They can cause
flatulence.
Bitter orange
Bitter orange contains
synephrine (a stimulant). It’s
claimed to burn calories,
increase fat breakdown, and
decrease appetite. Products
with bitter orange usually also
contain caffeine and other
ingredients. Bitter orange is in
some weight loss dietary
supplements that used to
contain ephedra, another
stimulant-containing herb that
was banned from the U.S.
market in 2004 (see the
section on Ephedra).
Does it work?
Bitter orange might slightly
increase the number of
calories you burn. It might also
reduce your appetite a little, but
whether it can help you lose
weight is unknown.
Is it safe?
Bitter orange might not be
safe. Supplements with bitter
orange can cause chest pain,
anxiety, headache, muscle and
bone pain, a faster heart rate,
and higher blood pressure.
Caffeine
Caffeine is a stimulant that can
make you more alert, give you
a boost of energy, burn
calories, and increase fat
breakdown. Often added to
weight-loss dietary
supplements, caffeine is found
naturally in tea, guarana, kola
(cola) nut, yerba mate, and
other herbs. The labels of
supplements that contain
caffeine don’t always list it, so
you might not know if a
supplement has caffeine.
Does it work?
Weight-loss dietary
supplements with caffeine
might help you lose a little
weight or gain less weight over
time. When you use caffeine
regularly, however, you become
tolerant of it. This tolerance
might lessen any effect of
caffeine on body weight over
time.
Is it safe?
Caffeine is safe for most adults
at doses up to 400‒500
milligrams (mg) a day, but it
can make you feel nervous,
jittery, and shaky. It can also
affect your sleep. At higher
doses, it can cause nausea,
vomiting, rapid heartbeat, and
seizures. Combining caffeine
with other stimulant
ingredients can increase
caffeine’s effects.

[page 3]
Calcium
Calcium is a mineral you need
for healthy bones, muscles,
nerves, blood vessels, and
many of your body’s functions.
It’s claimed to burn fat and
decrease fat absorption.
Does it work?
Calcium—either from food or in
weight-loss dietary
supplements—probably doesn’t
help you lose weight or prevent
weight gain.
Is it safe?
Calcium is safe at the
recommended amounts of
1,000 to 1,200 mg a day for
adults. Too much calcium
(more than 2,000–2,500 mg a
day) can cause constipation
and decrease your body’s
absorption of iron and zinc.
Also, too much calcium from
supplements (but not foods)
might increase your risk of
kidney stones.
Capsaicin
Capsaicin comes from chili
peppers and makes them taste
hot. It’s claimed to help burn
fat and calories and to help you
feel full and eat less.
Does it work?
Capsaicin hasn’t been studied
enough to know if it will help
you lose weight.
Is it safe?
Capsaicin is safe (at up to 33
mg a day for 4 weeks or 4 mg a
day for 12 weeks), but it can
cause stomach pain, burning
sensations, nausea, and
bloating.
Carnitine
Your body makes carnitine, and
it’s also found in meat, fish,
poultry, milk, and dairy
products. In your cells, it helps
break down fats.
Does it work?
Carnitine supplements might
help you lose a small amount
of weight.
Is it safe?
Carnitine supplements seem to
be safe (at up to 2 g a day for 1
year or 4 g a day for 56 days).
They can cause nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal
cramps, and a fishy body odor.
Chitosan
Chitosan comes from the
shells of crabs, shrimp, and
lobsters. It’s claimed to bind fat
in the digestive tract so that
your body can’t absorb it.
Does it work?
Chitosan binds only a tiny
amount of fat, not enough to
help you lose much weight.
Is it safe?
Chitosan seems to be safe (at
up to 15 g a day for 6 months).
However, it can cause
flatulence, bloating, mild
nausea, constipation,
indigestion, and heartburn. If
you’re allergic to shellfish, you
could have an allergic reaction
to chitosan.
Chromium
Chromium is a mineral that you
need to regulate your blood
sugar levels. It’s claimed to
increase muscle mass and fat
Does it work?
Chromium might help you lose
a very small amount of weight
and body fat.
Is it safe?
Chromium in food and
supplements is safe at
recommended amounts, which
range from 20 to 45
micrograms a day for adults. In

[page 4]
loss and decrease appetite and
food intake.
larger amounts, chromium can
cause watery stools, headache,
weakness, nausea, vomiting,
constipation, dizziness, and
hives.
Coleus forskohlii
Coleus forskohlii is a plant that
grows in India, Thailand, and
other subtropical areas.
Forskolin, made from the
plant’s roots, is claimed to help
you lose weight by decreasing
your appetite and increasing
the breakdown of fat in your
body.
Does it work?
Forskolin hasn’t been studied
much. So far, however, it
doesn’t seem to have any
effect on body weight or
appetite.
Is it safe?
Forskolin seems to be safe (at
500 mg a day for 12 weeks),
but it hasn’t been well studied.
It can cause frequent bowel
movements and loose stools.
Conjugated linoleic acid
Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA)
is a fat found mainly in dairy
products and beef. It’s claimed
to reduce your body fat.
Does it work?
CLA may help you lose a very
small amount of weight and
body fat.
Is it safe?
CLA seems to be safe (at up to
6 g a day for 1 year). It can
cause an upset stomach,
constipation, diarrhea, loose
stools, and indigestion.
Fucoxanthin
Fucoxanthin comes from
brown seaweed and other
algae. It’s claimed to help with
weight loss by burning calories
and decreasing fat.
Does it work?
Fucoxanthin hasn’t been
studied enough to know if it
will help you lose weight. Only
one study in people included
fucoxanthin (the other studies
were in animals).
Is it safe?
Fucoxanthin seems to be safe
(at 2.4 mg a day for 16 weeks),
but it hasn’t been studied
enough to know for sure.
Garcinia cambogia
Garcinia cambogia is a tree that
grows throughout Asia, Africa,
and the Polynesian islands.
Hydroxycitric acid in the fruit is
claimed to decrease the
number of new fat cells your
body makes, suppress your
appetite and thus reduce the
amount of food you eat, and
limit the amount of weight you
gain.
Does it work?
Garcinia cambogia has little to
no effect on weight loss.
Is it safe?
Garcinia cambogia seems to be
fairly safe. However, it can
cause headache, nausea, and
symptoms in the upper
respiratory tract, stomach, and
intestines.
Glucomannan
Glucomannan is a soluble
dietary fiber from the root of
Does it work?
Glucomannan has little to no
effect on weight loss. But it
Is it safe?
Most forms of glucomannan
seem to be safe (at up to 15.1

[page 5]
the konjac plant. It’s claimed to
absorb water in the gut to help
you feel full.
might help lower total
cholesterol, LDL (bad)
cholesterol, triglycerides, and
blood sugar levels.
g a day for several weeks in a
powder or capsule form). It can
cause loose stools, flatulence,
diarrhea, constipation, and
abdominal discomfort.
Green coffee bean extract
Green coffee beans are
unroasted coffee beans. Green
coffee bean extract is claimed
to decrease fat accumulation
and help convert blood sugar
into energy that your cells can
use.
Does it work?
Green coffee bean extract
might help you lose a small
amount of weight.
Is it safe?
Green coffee bean extract
seems to be safe (at up to 200
mg a day for 12 weeks). It
might cause headache and
urinary tract infections. Green
coffee beans contain the
stimulant caffeine, which can
cause problems at high doses
or when it’s combined with
other stimulants (see the
section on Caffeine).
Green tea and green tea
extract
Green tea (also called Camellia
sinensis) is a common
beverage all over the world.
Green tea and green tea extract
in some weight-loss
supplements are claimed to
reduce body weight by
increasing the calories your
body burns, breaking down fat
cells, and decreasing fat
absorption and the amount of
new fat your body makes.
Does it work?
Green tea might help you lose a
small amount of weight.
Is it safe?
Drinking green tea is safe, but
taking green tea extract might
not be. Green tea extract can
cause constipation, abdominal
discomfort, nausea, and
increased blood pressure. In
some people, it has been linked
to liver damage.
Guar gum
Guar gum is a soluble dietary
fiber in some dietary
supplements and food
products. It’s claimed to make
you feel full, lower your
appetite, and decrease the
amount of food you eat.
Does it work?
Guar gum probably doesn’t
help you lose weight.
Is it safe?
Guar gum seems to be safe (at
up to 30 g a day for 6 months)
when it is taken with enough
fluid. However, it can cause
abdominal pain, flatulence,
diarrhea, nausea, and cramps.
Hoodia
Hoodia is a plant from
southern Africa, where it’s used
as an appetite suppressant.
Does it work?
There hasn’t been much
research on hoodia, but it
probably won’t help you eat
Is it safe?
Hoodia might not be safe. It
can cause rapid heart rate,
increased blood pressure,

[page 6]
less or lose weight. Analyses
showed that some hoodia
supplements sold in the past
contained very little hoodia or
none at all. It’s not known
whether this is true of hoodia
supplements sold today.
headache, dizziness, nausea,
and vomiting.
Probiotics
Probiotics are microorganisms
in foods, such as some
yogurts, and some dietary
supplements that help
maintain or restore beneficial
bacteria in your digestive tract.
Does it work?
It’s unclear whether probiotic
supplements have any effect
on weight or body fat.
Is it safe?
Probiotics are safe in healthy
people but may cause gas or
other gastrointestinal
problems.
Pyruvate
Pyruvate is naturally present in
your body. Pyruvate in weight-
loss supplements is claimed to
increase fat breakdown, reduce
body weight and body fat, and
improve exercise performance.
Does it work?
Pyruvate in supplements might
help you lose a small amount
of weight.
Is it safe?
Pyruvate seems to be safe (at
up to 30 g a day for 6 weeks). It
can cause diarrhea, gas,
bloating, and rumbling noises
in the intestines due to gas.
Raspberry ketone
Raspberry ketone, found in red
raspberries, is claimed to be a
fat burner.
Does it work?
Raspberry ketone has only
been studied as a weight-loss
aid in combination with other
ingredients and not alone. Its
effects on body weight are
unknown.
Is it safe?
Raspberry ketone hasn’t been
studied enough to tell if it’s
safe.
Vitamin D
Your body needs vitamin D for
good health and strong bones.
People who are obese tend to
have lower levels of vitamin D,
but there is no known reason
why taking vitamin D would
help people lose weight.
Does it work?
Vitamin D doesn’t help you lose
weight.
Is it safe?
Vitamin D from foods and
dietary supplements is safe at
the recommended amounts of
15‒20 mcg (600‒800
International Units [IU]) a day
for adults. Too much vitamin D
(more than 100 mcg [4,000 IU]
a day) can be toxic and cause
nausea, vomiting, poor
appetite, constipation,
weakness, and irregular
heartbeat.
White kidney bean/bean pod
White kidney bean or bean pod
Does it work?
Phaseolus vulgaris extract
Is it safe?
Phaseolus vulgaris seems to be

[page 7]
(also called Phaseolus vulgaris)
is a legume grown around the
world. An extract of this bean
is claimed to block the
absorption of carbohydrates
and suppress your appetite.
might help you lose a small
amount of weight and body fat.
safe (at up to 3,000 mg a day
for 12 weeks). However, it
might cause headaches, soft
stools, flatulence, and
constipation.
Yohimbe
Yohimbe is a West African tree.
Yohimbe, which contains a
compound called yohimbine, is
an ingredient found in some
dietary supplements claiming
to increase weight loss,
improve libido, increase muscle
mass, or treat male sexual
dysfunction.
Does it work?
Yohimbe doesn’t help you lose
weight.
Is it safe?
Yohimbe might not be safe
(especially at yohimbine doses
of 20 mg or higher). Use it only
with guidance from your health
care provider because the side
effects can be severe. Yohimbe
can cause headaches, high
blood pressure, anxiety,
agitation, rapid heartbeat, heart
attack, heart failure, and death.
Ephedra, an ingredient banned from dietary supplements
Ephedra (also called má huáng) is a plant containing substances that can stimulate your nervous
system, increase the amount of energy you burn, increase weight loss, and suppress your appetite.
In the 1990s, ephedra was a popular ingredient in dietary supplements sold for weight loss and to
enhance athletic performance. In 2004, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) banned
ephedra in dietary supplements, concluding that it isn’t safe. Ephedra can cause nausea, vomiting,
anxiety, mood changes, high blood pressure, abnormal heartbeat, stroke, seizures, heart attack, and
death.
How are weight-loss dietary supplements regulated?
FDA is the federal agency that oversees dietary supplements in the United States. Unlike over-the-
counter and prescription drugs—which must be approved by FDA before they can be sold—dietary
supplements don’t require review or approval by FDA before they are put on the market. Also,
manufacturers don’t have to provide evidence to FDA that their products are safe or effective before
selling these products.
When FDA finds an unsafe dietary supplement, it can remove the supplement from the market or
ask the supplement maker to recall it. FDA and the Federal Trade Commission can also take
enforcement action against companies that make false weight-loss claims about their
supplements; add pharmaceutical drugs to their supplements; or claim that their supplements can
diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent a disease.
For more information about dietary supplement regulations, see the Office of Dietary Supplements
(ODS) publication, Dietary Supplements: What You Need to Know.
Can weight-loss dietary supplements be harmful?

[page 8]
Weight-loss supplements, like all dietary supplements, can have harmful side effects and might
interact with prescription and over-the-counter medications. Many weight-loss supplements have
ingredients that haven’t been tested in combination with one another, and their combined effects
are unknown.
Tell your health care providers about any weight-loss supplements or other supplements you take.
This information will help them work with you to prevent supplement-drug interactions, harmful side
effects, and other risks.
Fraudulent and adulterated products
Be very cautious when you see weight-loss supplements with tempting claims, such as magic diet
pill, melt away fat, and lose weight without diet or exercise. If the claim sounds too good to be true,
it probably is. These products might not help you lose weight—and they could be dangerous.
Weight-loss products marketed as dietary supplements are sometimes adulterated with
prescription drugs or controlled substances. These ingredients won’t be listed on the product label,
and they could harm you. FDA puts out public notifications about tainted weight-loss products
(https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/BuyingUsingMedicineSafely/MedicationHealthFra
ud/ucm234592.htm).
Interactions with medications
Like most dietary supplements, some weight-loss supplements can interact or interfere with other
medicines or supplements you take. If you take dietary supplements and medications on a regular
basis, be sure to talk about this with your health care provider.
Choosing a sensible approach to weight loss
Weight-loss supplements can be expensive, and they might not work. The best way to lose weight
and keep it off is to follow a healthy eating pattern, reduce calories, and exercise regularly under the
guidance of your health care provider.
As a bonus, lifestyle changes that help you lose weight might also improve your mood and energy
level and lower your risk of heart disease, diabetes, and some types of cancer.
Where can I find out more?
For general information on weight-loss dietary supplements
ODS Health Professional Fact Sheet on Weight-Loss Dietary Supplements
Weighing the Claims in Diet Ads (https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/0061-weighing-
claims-diet-ads), Federal Trade Commission
For publications about weight control, obesity, physical activity, and nutrition
The Weight-control Information Network (https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-
information/communication-programs/win), National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Weight Control (https://medlineplus.gov/weightcontrol.html), MedlinePlus, NIH
For more advice on choosing dietary supplements

[page 9]
ODS Frequently Asked Questions: Which brand(s) of dietary supplements should I
purchase?
For information about building a healthy dietary pattern
Dietary Guidelines for Americans (https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov)
Disclaimer
This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS)
provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to
your healthcare providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in,
questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any
mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an
organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product,
service, or expert advice.
Glossary
absorption
In nutrition, the process of moving protein, carbohydrates, fats, and other nutrients from the
digestive system into the bloodstream. Most absorption occurs in the small intestine.
adulterate
To make unsafe or impure by using contaminated or unneeded ingredients; using a strength
or quality that is less than claimed; leaving out or substituting key ingredients; or using inferior
manufacturing, processing, packaging, or storage procedures.
adverse event
An unwanted medical problem that occurs during treatment. Adverse events may be unrelated
to the treatment or they may be caused by the therapy or procedure. For example, an adverse
event may be caused by the toxic effects of a particular drug or dietary supplement or by an
interaction with another therapy. Also called adverse effect and side effect.
cancer
A group of diseases in which cells divide abnormally and without control, and spread to
nearby tissues and other parts of the body. Without treatment, cancer can stop organs from
working normally, damage body systems, and cause the patient to die. Cancer may be caused
by multiple factors, such as radiation, sunlight, tobacco, certain viruses, and poisonous
chemicals; however, the cause of many cancers is unknown.
capsule
A gelatin shell containing a dose of medicine, a vitamin, or other dietary supplement.
control
In a clinical trial, the group of participants that does not receive the new treatment being
studied. This group is compared with the group receiving the new treatment, to see whether
the new treatment works. In an observational study, the controls are participants who do not
have a particular health condition; the control group is compared with the group of
participants who do have the condition to see if certain factors (such as diet, activity level, or
use of dietary supplements) may be associated with developing or preventing the condition.
cure
To heal or restore health; a treatment to restore health.
diabetes

[page 10]
A disease in which blood sugar (glucose) levels are high because the body is unable to use
glucose properly. Diabetes occurs when the body does not make enough insulin, which helps
the cells use glucose, or when the body no longer responds to insulin.
diagnose
The process of using signs and symptoms to identify a disease.
dietary fiber
A substance in plants that you cannot digest. It adds bulk to your diet to make you feel full,
helps prevent constipation, and may help lower the risk of heart disease and diabetes. Good
sources of dietary fiber include whole grains (such as brown rice, oats, quinoa, bulgur, and
popcorn), legumes (such as black beans, garbanzo beans, split peas, and lentils), nuts, seeds,
fruit, and vegetables.
dietary supplement
A product that is intended to supplement the diet. A dietary supplement contains one or more
dietary ingredients (including vitamins, minerals, herbs or other botanicals, amino acids, and
other substances) or their components; is intended to be taken by mouth as a pill, capsule,
tablet, or liquid; and is identified on the front label of the product as being a dietary
supplement.
drug
Any substance (other than food) that is used to prevent, diagnose, treat, or relieve symptoms
of a disease or abnormal condition. Also, a substance that alters mood or body function or
that can be habit-forming or addictive, especially a narcotic.
effectiveness
In medicine, the ability of an intervention (for example, a drug, surgery, or a dietary
supplement) to produce the desired beneficial effect under the usual conditions of care by a
health care provider.
evidence
Information used to support the use of a particular screening procedure, treatment, or
preventive measure. In medicine, evidence needed to determine effectiveness is provided by
laboratory research, clinical trials, and other studies.
Federal Trade Commission
FTC. A federal agency that protects consumers by preventing deceptive and unfair business
practices. This includes unfair or deceptive advertising and marketing practices.
Food and Drug Administration
FDA, Department of Health and Human Services. FDA is the Federal government agency
responsible for ensuring that foods and dietary supplements are safe, wholesome and
sanitary, and that drugs, medical devices, cosmetics, and food are honestly, accurately and
informatively represented to the public. FDA regulates dietary supplements under a different
set of regulations than those covering conventional foods and drug products (prescription and
over-the-counter). The dietary supplement manufacturer is responsible for ensuring that a
dietary supplement is safe before it is marketed. FDA is responsible for taking action against
any unsafe dietary supplement product after it reaches the market. Generally, manufacturers
do not need to get FDA approval before producing or selling dietary supplements.
heart attack
The blockage of an artery supplying blood and oxygen to the heart, resulting in the damage or
death of a section of heart muscle.
herb
A plant used in cooking, in tea, and for medicinal purposes.
high blood pressure
A blood pressure measurement of 140/90 mmHg (millimeters of mercury) or higher is
considered high blood pressure (hypertension). Blood pressure is the force of blood pushing
against the walls of the arteries. Blood pressure measurements are written as two numbers,
for example 120/80. The first number (the systolic pressure) measures the pressure when the

[page 11]
heart beats and pumps out blood into the arteries. The second number (the diastolic
pressure) measures the pressure when the heart is at rest between beats. High blood
pressure is a condition that occurs when a person’s blood pressure often measures above
140/90 or regularly stays at that level or higher. This condition usually has no symptoms but
can be life-threatening. It damages the arteries and increases the chance of stroke, heart
attack, kidney failure, and blindness. Also called hypertension.
ingredient
In a dietary supplement, an ingredient is a component of the product, such as the main
nutrient (vitamin, mineral, herb, amino acid, or enzyme) or any binder, color, filler flavor, or
sweetener. In herbal supplements, the common name and Latin name (the genus and
species) of the plant is given in the ingredient list. On a dietary supplement label, the
ingredients are listed by weight, with the ingredient used in the largest amount first on the list
and the ingredient used in the least amount at the end of the list.
interaction
A change in the way a dietary supplement acts in the body when taken with certain other
supplements, medicines, or foods, or when taken with certain medical conditions. Interactions
may cause the dietary supplement to be more or less effective, or cause effects on the body
that are not expected.
kidney disease
A condition that lessens the ability of the kidneys to filter wastes from the blood, keep blood
chemical levels balanced, and make certain hormones. The two most common causes of
kidney disease are diabetes and high blood pressure. People with long-term kidney disease
may need dialysis or a kidney transplant to stay alive.
label
When referring to dietary supplements, information that appears on the product container,
including a descriptive name of the product stating that it is a “supplement”; the name and
place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor; a complete list of ingredients;
and each dietary ingredient contained in the product. Supplements must also include
directions for use, nutrition labeling in the form of a Supplement Facts panel that identifies
each dietary ingredient contained in the product and the serving size, amount, and active
ingredients.
liver
A large organ located in the right upper abdomen. It stores nutrients that come from food,
makes chemicals needed by the body, and breaks down some medicines and harmful
substances so they can be removed from the body.
metabolism
All chemical changes that take place in a cell or an organism. These changes produce energy
and basic materials needed for important life processes.
mineral
In nutrition, an inorganic substance found in the earth that is required to maintain health.
National Institutes of Health
NIH. The main organization in the federal government responsible for conducting and
supporting medical research. It is composed of 27 Institutes and Centers that provide
financial support to researchers in the United States and throughout the world to investigate
ways to prevent, treat, and cure common and rare diseases. NIH is part of the US Department
of Health and Human Services.
nausea
The uneasy feeling of having an urge to throw up (vomit).
nervous system
The brain and spinal cord, including the network of nerves that carry messages back and forth
between the brain and all parts of the body. The nervous system controls what the body does.
nutrition

[page 12]
The process of eating, digesting, and absorbing nutrients (such as protein, carbohydrate, fat,
vitamins, minerals, and water) from food to maintain the body, grow new cells, repair tissues,
and supply energy. Nutrition is also the science of food, diet, and health.
obesity
A condition characterized by an excessive amount of body fat. Obesity can be assessed by
calculating the body mass index (BMI). (BMI is a number that estimates the amount of body
fat on a person, based on weight and height. In adults, a BMI of 30 or higher indicates obesity.
Some people, such as bodybuilders or other athletes with a lot of muscle, can be overweight
without having obesity. See: overweight.
Office of Dietary Supplements
ODS, Office of Disease Prevention, Office of Director, National Institutes of Health, Department
of Health and Human Services. ODS strengthens knowledge and understanding of dietary
supplements by evaluating scientific information, stimulating and supporting research,
disseminating research results, and educating the public to foster an enhanced quality of life
and health for the US population.
prescription
A written order from a health care provider for medicine, therapy, or tests.
prevent
To stop from happening.
risk
The chance or probability that a harmful event will occur. In health, for example, the chance
that someone will develop a disease or condition.
seizure
Sudden changes in behavior caused by excessive electrical activity in the brain.
stroke
A loss of blood flow to part of the brain. Strokes are caused by blood clots or broken blood
vessels in the brain, and result in damage to a section of brain tissue. Symptoms include
dizziness, numbness, weakness on one side of the body, and problems with talking or
understanding language. The chance (risk) of stroke is increased by high blood pressure, older
age, smoking, diabetes, high cholesterol, heart disease, a family history of stroke, and a build-
up of fatty material inside the coronary arteries (atherosclerosis). See also NIH publication:
Know Stroke. Know the Signs. Act in Time.
http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/stroke/knowstroke.htm
(http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/stroke/knowstroke.htm)
supplement
A nutrient that may be added to the diet to increase the intake of that nutrient. Sometimes
used to mean dietary supplement.
treat
To care for a patient with a disease by using medicine, surgery, or other approaches.
Updated: March 22, 2021 History of changes to this fact sheet