

[page 1]
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health
NCCIH Clinical Digest
for health professionals
Dietary Supplements Marketed for
Weight Loss, Bodybuilding, and
Sexual Enhancement: What the
Science Says
December 2022
Clinical Guidelines, Scientific Literature, Info for Patients: 
Dietary Supplements Marketed for Weight Loss, Bodybuilding, and
Sexual Enhancement
Weight Loss
Most dietary supplements
marketed for rapid weight loss,
such as acai and hoodia, are
ineffective for long-term weight
control, and some have serious
safety concerns. Researchers have
investigated the weight loss
potential of a variety of dietary
supplements, including green tea extracts, Chinese herbs, and bitter
orange extract, but none have been shown to be effective for weight
loss, and each has side effects.
What Does the Research Show?
An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know

[page 2]
Acai berry. No independent studies have been published in peer-
reviewed journals that substantiate claims that acai alone
promotes rapid weight loss. A 2010 laboratory study examining
the safety profile of an acai-fortified juice found no changes in
body weight compared with controls.
Bitter orange. A  2020 review concluded that bitter orange, as
well as other dietary supplements, are unlikely to contribute to
meaningful weight loss. A 2004 systematic review of only one
eligible randomized controlled trial of 20 people found no
statistically significant benefit for weight loss. Similarly,
another 2004 review found little evidence that weight loss
products containing bitter orange (Citrus aurantium) are an
effective aid to weight loss.
Ephedra. A 2003 study examining the relative safety of ephedra
compared with other herbal products by analyzing phone calls to
poison control centers found a higher rate of side effects from
ephedra. Other studies and systematic reviews have found an
increased risk of heart, psychiatric, and gastrointestinal problems,
as well as high blood pressure and stroke, with ephedra use.
Green tea. A 2020 review concluded that green tea, as well as
other dietary supplements, are unlikely to contribute to meaningful
weight loss. A 2012 Cochrane review
 of 18 randomized
controlled trials of at least 12 weeks’ duration in overweight or
obese adults found that the loss in weight in adults who had taken
a green tea preparation was very small, not statistically significant,
and not likely to be clinically important.
Mind and body approaches. There is some emerging evidence
suggesting that some mind and body approaches, such as yoga
and meditation, particularly mindful eating, may be useful as
complements to other weight-loss interventions.
Safety
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) banned the sale of
dietary supplements containing ephedra, which were marketed for
weight loss, because of serious health risks, such as
cardiovascular complications and even risk of death. Ephedra is
also called ma huang.

[page 3]
Many ephedra-free supplements are now being sold, but side
effects of some of their ingredients are similar to those of the
banned products. Some ephedra-free supplements also have a lot
of caffeine or herbs, such as guarana, that contain caffeine. The
products can cause increased heart rate and abnormal heart
rhythms.
Many dietary supplements marketed for weight loss (including
ones sold as “fat burners” or appetite suppressants) have not
been tested for safety.
Bodybuilding and Performance
Enhancement
Some bodybuilders and athletes use dietary supplements to try to
improve their strength, muscle mass, and energy. However, many of
these types of products contain harmful ingredients. Also, for some
substances, including glutamine, choline, methoxyisoflavone,
quercetin, zinc/magnesium aspartate, nitric oxide, and L-arginine,
there is no clear evidence that they improve athletic performance.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) maintains a list of
banned substances and explains that some dietary supplements may
contain banned substances not listed on the product labels. BMPEA (a
phenethylamine) and DMAA (dimethylamylamine) are two examples of
substances banned by the NCAA.
What Does the Research Show?
Studies have looked at a variety of supplements used for
bodybuilding or to improve physical performance, including
glutamine, choline, methoxyisoflavone, quercetin,
zinc/magnesium aspartate, nitric oxide, and L-arginine. There is
no clear evidence these supplements improve athletic
performance.
The results of studies on beta-alanine, an amino acid found in
food and dietary supplements, are mixed but generally do not
show that it improves athletic performance significantly.

[page 4]
Some studies suggest that creatine supplementation may
enhance the effects of vigorous exercise on strength, muscle
mass, and endurance, but it may also cause fluid weight gain,
nausea, cramping, and diarrhea. A 2021 review concluded that
daily supplementation of creatine over several days leads to
increased concentrations of intramuscular creatine and
intramuscular phosphocreatine (PCr), which are associated with a
reduction of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) degradation,
heightened ATP production, and an increase in energetic output
during activities involving intermittent, high-intensity, short bouts
of exercise. Additionally, the review found that supplementation
with creatine may help facilitate recovery following exercise-
induced muscle damage and may aid during post-injury
rehabilitation. 
Safety
Dangerous hidden ingredients are an increasing problem in
products promoted for bodybuilding, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) warns. Consumers may unknowingly take
products laced with prescription drug ingredients, controlled
substances, and other ingredients.
Bodybuilding supplements often are adulterated with anabolic
steroids that are modified variants of male hormones designed to
increase muscle mass.
Liver injury from taking bodybuilding dietary supplements has
increased in recent years. Bodybuilding products are the most
common cause of liver injury linked to herbal and dietary
supplement use.
Products containing the stimulants BMPEA or DMAA can cause
serious health problems.
Supplements labeled as containing the herb Acacia rigidula often
contain BMPEA, although BMPEA isn’t in the herb and isn’t a
dietary ingredient.
DMAA-containing products marketed as dietary supplements are
illegal. In 2013, the FDA began taking action to remove these
products from the market. However, DMAA is still found in some
products marketed as supplements, including under different
names, such as geranium oil.
Sexual Enhancement
No complementary health approaches have been shown to be safe

[page 5]
and effective for sexual enhancement or treating erectile dysfunction
(ED). Safety is a serious concern with regard to dietary supplements
promoted for ED or sexual enhancement.
What Does the Research Show?
Researchers have studied a variety of herbal remedies for ED, but
the amount of research on each herb has been small, and much
of the research has been done in animals rather than people.
Currently, there is no definite evidence that any herbal products
are effective or safe for ED.
A 2017 prospective, randomized controlled trial in 86 men with
mild to moderate ED found that following a 12-week treatment of
extracts of the plant Tribulus terrestris, significant improvement in
sexual function was observed with Tribulus terrestris compared
with placebo. An earlier study (2014) conducted in 30 men with
ED found that Tribulus terrestris was not more effective than
placebo on improving symptoms of ED or serum total
testosterone.
Safety
Many supplements promoted for ED and sexual enhancement—
sometimes called “herbal Viagra”—have been found to be
adulterated with drug ingredients or related substances. Some
products include combinations of multiple ingredients or
excessively high doses, both of which can be dangerous.
Consumers can’t tell whether a product contains these
ingredients because they’re not listed on the product label.
The drug ingredients in some ED supplements may interact with
prescription drugs. For example, some of them may interact with
drugs that contain nitrates, leading to a dangerous decrease in
blood pressure.
References
Bent S, Padula A, Neuhaus J. Safety and efficacy of Citrus aurantium
for weight loss. American Journal of
Cardiology. 2004;94(10):1359-1361.
Bent S, Tiedt TN, Odden MC, et al. The relative safety of ephedra
compared with other herbal products. Annals of Internal
Medicine. 2003;138(6):468-471.
Butts J, Jacobs B, Silvis M. Creatine use in sports. Sports Health.
2018;10(1):31-34.

[page 6]
Fugh-Berman A, Myers A. Citrus aurantium, an ingredient of dietary
supplements marketed for weight loss: current status of clinical
and basic research. Experimental Biology
Medicine. 2004;229(8):698-704.
Jurgens TM, Whelan AM, Killian L, et al. Green tea for weight loss and
weight maintenance in overweight or obese adults. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2012;(12):CD008650. Accessed
at cochranelibrary.com
 on January 23, 2023.
Kamenov Z, Fileva S, Kalinov K, et al. Evaluation of the efficacy and
safety of Tribulus terrestris in male sexual dysfunction—A
prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
trial. Maturitas. 2017;99:20-26.
Santos CA Jr, Reis LO, Destro-Saade R, et al. Tribulus terrestris versus
placebo in the treatment of erectile dysfunction: a prospective,
randomized, double blind study. Actas Urologicas
Espanolas. 2014;38(4):244-248.
Schauss AG, Clewell A, Balogh L, et al. Safety evaluation of an acai-
fortified fruit and berry functional juice beverage (MonaVie
Active®). Toxicology. 2010;278(1):46-54.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. DMAA in Dietary Supplements.
Accessed
at https://www.fda.gov/Food/DietarySupplements/ProductsIngred
ients/ucm346576.htm on January 10, 2018.
Wax B, Kerksick CM, Jagim AR, et al. Creatine for exercise and sports
performance, with recovery considerations for healthy
populations. Nutrients. 2021;13(6):1915.
Wharton S, Bonder R, Jeffery A, et al. The safety and effectiveness of
commonly-marketed natural supplements for weight loss in
populations with obesity: a critical review of the literature from
2006 to 2016. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition.
2020;60(10):1614-1630.
 
NCCIH Clinical Digest is a service of the National Center for
Complementary and Integrative Health, NIH, DHHS. NCCIH
Clinical Digest, a monthly e-newsletter, offers evidence-based

[page 7]
information on complementary health approaches, including
scientific literature searches, summaries of NCCIH-funded
research, fact sheets for patients, and more.
The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health is
dedicated to exploring complementary health products and
practices in the context of rigorous science, training
complementary health researchers, and disseminating
authoritative information to the public and professionals. For
additional information, call NCCIH’s Clearinghouse toll-free at 1-
888-644-6226, or visit the NCCIH website at nccih.nih.gov.
NCCIH is 1 of 27 institutes and centers at the National Institutes
of Health, the Federal focal point for medical research in the
United States.
Copyright
Content is in the public domain and may be reprinted, except if
marked as copyrighted (©). Please credit the National Center for
Complementary and Integrative Health as the source. All
copyrighted material is the property of its respective owners and
may not be reprinted without their permission.