

[page 1]
Dietary fat: Know which to
choose
Fat is an important part of your diet, but some kinds are
healthier than others. Find out which to choose and which to
avoid.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
April 15, 2026
The type of fat you eat every day, over a lifetime, can help keep you healthy.
Eating fats found in seafood or from most plant sources is linked to lower risks of
heart disease, diabetes and obesity when compared with diets high in fats from
animal sources or highly processed foods.
Why does the body need fat?
Fat helps the body function. It can be a source of energy, and it helps the body
use vitamins and other nutrients. The fat you eat also plays a role in hormone
production and in how the body's cells are made and work.
Types of fat
When you eat fat, your body breaks it into smaller parts called fatty acids. These
fall into two categories: saturated and unsaturated fatty acids.
Saturated fats have a stiff chemical structure and are often solid at room
temperature. Foods that have saturated fats include lard, beef tallow, meat, and

[page 2]
dairy foods such as whole milk, butter, some cheese and yogurts. Coconut oil and
palm oil also are high in saturated fats.
Unsaturated fats have a more flexible chemical structure. When separated from
food, they are often liquid at room temperature. Unsaturated fats can be either
monounsaturated or polyunsaturated. Omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids are
polyunsaturated.
Examples of unsaturated fats include:
Avacados and avocado oils.
Olives and extra-virgin olive oil.
Nuts, such as almonds, cashews, peanuts and hazelnuts.
Seeds, such as flaxseed, hemp seed and chia seed.
Soybeans, edamame and tofu.
Safflower, sunflower and corn oil.
Canola, soybean, flaxseed and walnut oil.
Seafood, such as shrimp, salmon, anchovies, sardines and tuna.
Trans fats naturally occur in meat and dairy products from grazing animals. But
most trans fats in food come from plant oils that are chemically changed to be
semisolid fats. This process is called partial hydrogenation.
Trans fats are often found in processed foods, such as fast food, commercial
baked goods, stick margarine and foods that are deep fried. This type of fat is less
expensive than other fats and gives food a long shelf life.
In the United States, trans fats cannot be used in food production. Food makers
in other countries may still use this ingredient.
Fats and health
Fat is a healthy part of the diet when it's balanced with carbohydrates, protein
and the needs of your body. Your age, sex, activity level, and if you're pregnant or
breastfeeding can change the amount of fat and other nutrients you need.
Two fatty acids, the omega-6 linoleic acid and the omega-3 alpha-linolenic acid
(ALA), are needed for the body but must come from the diet. You can find ALA
and linoleic acid in walnuts, flaxseed, chia seed and soybean products.

[page 3]
Some experts suggest that in a healthy diet, no more than about 30% of calories
should come from fat.
Fat and disease
Fat is one piece of a healthy eating pattern that can lower your risk of disease. The
type of fat you choose, your diet and lifestyle all affect your risk of heart disease.
For heart-healthy choices on fats and oils:
Cut out trans fats that are artificially created. Trans fats raise levels of blood
cholesterol linked to heart disease, called low-density lipoprotein (LDL).
Trans fats also lower blood cholesterol levels that helps keep the heart
healthy, called high-density lipoprotein (HDL).
Limit saturated fats, even if you are healthy. (8) Replace foods high in
saturated fat with nuts, seeds, avocados, fish, and plant oils from fruits,
seeds or nuts.
Some health guidelines suggest saturated fat should be less than 10% of your
calories. For example, if you have a 2,000-calorie diet, 10% is 22 grams of
saturated fat a day. For people with risk factors for heart disease, the American
Heart Association suggests less than 6% of your total calories come from
saturated fat.
Choosing unsaturated fats in place of saturated fats can improve blood
cholesterol, which may lower your risk of heart disease.
When it comes to cancer prevention, your overall diet matters more than just fat.
A higher risk of cancer seems to come from diets that are high in animal fats and
processed meat, as well as sugar.
A lower cancer risk is linked to diets focused on plant foods, including plant
protein sources such as legumes, as well as fish or poultry. Diets that help prevent
cancer tend to have more unsaturated fats than saturated fats.
Diets that focus on plants, where unsaturated fats are more common than
saturated fats, also tend to be linked to:
Lower inflammation levels.
Better blood glucose control.
Less damage to DNA.

[page 4]
Higher numbers of healthy gut bacteria.
Overall, eating fats from seafood or from plant sources is often linked to lower
levels of disease. But it is just one factor. Other diet choices, such as fiber intake,
and lifestyle choices, such as physical activity, play a role in disease development.
Should you choose low-fat or fat-free foods?
Products with fat removed can be healthy. But check the nutrition label. Foods
that have been processed to remove fat may have added sugars. These products
haven't been shown to help with health goals, such as weight or blood glucose
management, or overall heart health.
Reading labels
In the United States, the Nutrition Facts panel on a product calls out the total fat
in each serving. Under total fat amount, you will see amounts listed for saturated
fat and trans fat, even if the amount is zero. You also may see amounts listed for
polyunsaturated fats or monounsaturated fat.
For saturated fat, aim for less than 2 grams per serving. Saturated fats can add up
quickly in foods that combine ingredients, such as meat and dairy products.
Examples are tacos, cheeseburgers and Cobb salad. Baked goods with butter,
full-fat ice cream and other desserts are also popular sources of saturated fats.
Look at serving sizes and saturated fat amounts in the Nutrition Facts panel on
products or menus when you're planning a treat or meals.
In the ingredient list, items that have "partially" in the name likely contribute trans
fats to the product. Examples are partially hydrogenated palm oil or partially
hydrogenated sunflower oil. Trans fats found naturally in meat or dairy won't be
listed separately.
Baked goods, snack crackers or chips, and fried items commonly have ingredients
with saturated fats in the United States and trans fats where those ingredients
are still used.

[page 5]
How do you get started replacing saturated fats
with unsaturated fats?
Focus on getting more plants in your diet. Instead of butter or lard, use plant-
based oils such as extra-virgin olive oil.
Other ways to work healthy fats into the diet include:
Add fish to your diet, especially oily fish such as trout and salmon.
Choose lean meat and skinless poultry. Trim visible fat from meat. Remove
fat and skin from poultry.
Eat and drink low-fat dairy products.
Eat nuts, seeds and nut butters.
Limit processed foods, which often have saturated fat.
Keep your calorie limit in mind as you shift from saturated fats to unsaturated
fats. Dietary fat is important for health, but it's equally important to get the
recommended amounts of fruits, vegetables, legumes and whole grains in your
diet. These foods are rich in vitamins, nutrients and fiber.
1. Mozaffarian D. Dietary fat. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Feb. 25, 2026.
2. Ray S, et al., eds. Basic Principles of Nutrition. In: Essentials of Nutrition in Medicine and
Healthcare: A Practical Guide. Elsevier; 2024. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Feb. 24,
2026.
3. The skinny on fats. American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/health-
topics/cholesterol/prevention-and-treatment-of-high-cholesterol-hyperlipidemia/the-skinny-
on-fats. Accessed Feb. 25, 2026.
4. Colditz GA. Healthy diet in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Feb.
24, 2026.
5. Trans fat. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/food/food-additives-
petitions/trans-fat. Accessed Feb. 24, 2026.
6. What are healthy diets? Joint statement by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Health Organization. World Health Organization.
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240101876. Accessed Feb. 24, 2026.
7. Omega-3 fatty acids fact sheet for consumers. National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary
Supplements. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Omega3FattyAcids-Consumer. Accessed Feb.
24, 2026.

[page 6]
8. Fats in food. American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-
eating/eat-smart/fats/fats-in-foods. Accessed Feb. 24, 2026.
9. Rock CL, et al. American Cancer Society guideline for diet and physical activity for cancer
prevention. CA: A cancer journal for clinicians. 2020; doi:10.3322/caac.21591.
10. Medical review (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic. Feb. 26, 2026.
11. Heart healthy label reading tips. Nutrition Care Manual. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics.
https://www.nutritioncaremanual.org. Accessed Feb. 24, 2026.
12. Saturated fat. American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-
eating/eat-smart/fats/saturated-fats. Accessed Feb. 24, 2026.
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Notice of Nondiscrimination
Digital Accessibility Statement
Advertising & Sponsorship Policy
Site Map
© 1998-2026 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER).
All rights reserved.
ART-20045550