

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Donor human milk for
low-birth-weight
infants
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Every year, more than 20 million infants are born weighing less than 2.5kg – over 96% of
them in developing countries. These low-birth-weight (LBW) infants are at increased risk
of early growth retardation, infectious disease, developmental delay and death during
infancy and childhood.
Most LBW is a consequence of preterm birth, small size for gestational age, or both.
Interventions to improve the feeding of LBW infants are likely to improve the immediate
and longer-term health and well-being of the individual infant and have a significant
impact on neonatal and infant mortality levels in the population.

[page 2]
WHO recommends that LBW infants should be fed mother's own milk. When a mother's
own breast milk is not available, the alternatives are either expressed breast milk from a
donor mother or formula milk. Available evidence shows that compared with formula,
donor human milk is associated with lower incidence of the severe gut disorder,
necrotising enterocolitis, and other infections during the initial hospital stay after birth.
WHO Recommendations
WHO recommends that LBW infants, including those with very low birth weight, who
cannot be fed mother's own milk should be fed donor human milk.
This recommendation is relevant for settings where safe and affordable milk-banking
facilities are available or can be set up.
This recommendation does not address sick LBW infants or infants with birth
weight less than 1.0 kg.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidelines on optimal feeding of low birth-weight infants in low- and
middle-income countries
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Optimal feeding of low-birth-weight infants: technical review
Edmond K, Bahl R. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006.
Related Cochrane reviews

[page 3]
Formula versus donor breast milk for feeding preterm or low birth weight infants
Quigley M, Embleton ND, McGuire W. ochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019; Issue 7. Art. No.:
CD002971.
Other related systematic reviews
Donor breast milk versus infant formula for preterm infants: systematic review and meta-
analysis
Boyd CA, Quigley MA, Brocklehurst P. Archives of Disease in Childhood: Fetal and Neonatal Edition. 2007;
92:F169-F175.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Costs of necrotizing enterocolitis and cost-effectiveness of exclusively human milk-based
products in feeding extremely premature infants
Ganapathy V, Hay JW, Kim JH. Breastfeed Med. 2012; 7(1):29-37.
Cost-Effectiveness of Supplemental Donor Milk Versus Formula for Very Low Birth Weight
Infants
Trang S, Zupancic JAF, Unger S, Kiss A, Bando N, Wong S, et al. Pediatrics. 2018; 141(3).
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Category 1 Intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions

[page 4]
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO