

[page 1]
Electronic cigarettes (E-cigarettes)
1
2
3
4
E-cigarettes are the most common type of electronic
nicotine 
delivery 
system 
(ENDS) 
and 
electronic
non-nicotine delivery system (ENNDS). E-cigarettes heat a
liquid to create aerosols that are inhaled by the user. These
so-called e-liquids do not contain tobacco and may or may
not contain nicotine. They also typically contain additives,
flavours and chemicals that can be harmful to people’s
health (1).
The global market for e-cigarettes is growing rapidly. Since 
2018, there has been a significant increase in the size of the 
global e-cigarette market, from US$ 7 806 million in 2015 
to US$ 22 349 million in 2022 (2). Countries in the Asia-Pacific 
region are experiencing faster growth of e-cigarette sales than 
in other regions (3).
Key messages
Use of e-cigarettes is growing rapidly, especially among children and young people.
E-cigarettes contain toxic substances that are harmful to people’s health,
sometimes at levels higher than in tobacco smoke.
E-cigarettes have not been proven to be effective for smoking cessation at the
population level and may lead to ongoing nicotine dependence.
Member States should consider banning or regulating e-cigarettes alongside 
a comprehensive approach to tobacco control.
|||||||||||||||||||
1
Children and young people are deliberately 
and aggressively targeted
E-cigarettes offer, by far, the most flavours among all nicotine and tobacco products. Many of these flavours are appealing
to children. Flavours can increase the general toxicity of the aerosols, mask the harsh taste of nicotine, play a role in
product use initiation and serve as a path from experimentation to regular use.
Marketing of e-cigarettes usually relies heavily on social media and influencers. Even brief 
exposure to e-cigarette content on social media is associated with adolescents’ greater 
intention to use these products, as well as more positive attitudes towards e-cigarettes.
Many e-cigarettes are designed to allow discreet use and are marketed as such. They may 
resemble lipsticks or watches, making them easier to  hide and more difficult to detect or 
recognize, especially by teachers and parents.
Some forms of e-cigarettes - such as disposable e-cigarettes, which are particularly popular 
with youth - have increased in size, contain much more nicotine, and are increasingly 
becoming more affordable and accessible (2).
In countries where comparison is possible, adolescent e-cigarette use prevalence 
is  on average nine times higher than among adults (4).
E-cigarettes emit toxic substances - including
carcinogens - and are associated with various health
risks such as lung disorders, poisoning, injuries,
burns and negative cardiovascular effects. Exposure
to emissions from e-cigarettes also poses risks to
bystanders.
ENDS contain nicotine (sometimes at very high levels), 
a highly addictive substance that can adversely affect 
the development of the fetus in a pregnant women, as 
well as negatively affect brain development in children 
and adolescents.
E-cigarettes come in many varieties and many allow
users to customize the products, including increasing
nicotine uptake and/or the level of toxicants.
Sometimes the level of toxicants reaches higher levels
than in tobacco smoke.
Dual use − when people use both conventional 
cigarettes and e-cigarettes − is common and is as 
dangerous or likely more dangerous than using only 
one of these products (2).
What are e-cigarettes?
The e-cigarette market is growing rapidly 
Devices may resemble a highlighter pen, portable gaming console, wireless 
earbuds, hand-held two-way radio transmitter or a toy, among other items.
Illustration of the many 
e-cigarette flavours (3).
E-cigarettes are harmful

[page 2]
E-cigarettes used as consumer products
As of December 2024, the sale of e-cigarettes has been banned in 12 out of 38 countries 
and areas in the Western Pacific Region, representing an increase of four countries from 
the previous assessment in 2022. Nineteen have adopted measures that either fully or 
partially regulate e-cigarettes. These include bans on the use of e-cigarettes in public 
areas; bans on advertising, promotion and sponsorship; requiring health warnings on 
packaging; age restrictions on the sale of e-cigarettes; and flavouring restrictions. However, 
seven countries and areas have no regulation on e-cigarettes or no data are available on 
e-cigarette regulations (5, 6). No country in the Western Pacific Region has implemented a
ban on flavours of e-cigarettes; four countries ban only selected flavours or allow specific
ones (6). WHO estimates that 5.4% of adolescents aged 13-15 years use e-cigarettes in the
Region, which accounts for almost one third of all global adolescent users (4).
The WHO publication Electronic cigarettes: call to action urges governments to take 
action to protect children and prevent the uptake of e-cigarettes.
Whether countries ban sale of e-cigarettes or permit commercialization as consumer products:
Action on e-cigarettes should form part of  
a comprehensive approach to tobacco control.
Actions should be taken alongside efforts to help 
current tobacco users to quit using proven methods.
1
2
Where countries ban sale 
of e-cigarettes:
Where countries permit commercialization (sale, importation, 
distribution and manufacture) of e-cigarettes as consumer products:
Ensure strong implementation of 
the ban.
Monitor and conduct surveillance 
to support a real-time view of 
uptake and patterns of use.
Implement 
complementary 
measures such as prohibiting 
advertising, promotion and 
sponsorship (including digital 
marketing), 
and 
effective 
enforcementmeasures.
All tobacco, nicotine and related products are harmful. Tobacco and nicotine companies are misappropriating the concept 
of “harm reduction” to market tobacco and nicotine products, including e-cigarettes. The importance of comprehensive 
regulatory measures is highlighted in the WHO Position on Tobacco Control and Harm Reduction –  governments can best 
protect health by fully implementing comprehensive tobacco control measures that reduce demand and supply for all tobacco, 
nicotine and related products. 
Reduce the appeal and harm 
to the population (for example, 
through  regulating flavouring 
agents, attractive features, etc.).
Protect the public from misleading 
or deceptive claims, such as false 
claims about safety or efficacy for 
quitting cigarette smoking.
Prohibit 
sale 
of 
e-cigarettes 
to children; control the supply 
chain to reduce the risk of 
children gaining access; enforce 
restrictions and hold responsible 
entities accountable.
Apply 
tobacco 
control 
measures to e-cigarettes.
Strengthen monitoring and 
surveillance to gain a real-time 
view of uptake and patterns 
of use.
Strengthen enforcement to 
ensure that measures taken 
are effective.
Share information with the 
public on the harmful effects 
of e-cigarette use.
||||||||||
References
1. Tobacco: E-cigarettes. In: World Health Organization [website]. 19 January 2024 
(https://www.who.int/news-room/questions-and-answers/item/tobacco-e-cigarettes).
2. Technical note on Call to action on electronic cigarettes. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023 
(https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/technical-note-on-call-to-action-on-electronic-cigarettes).
3. WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic 2021: addressing new and emerging products. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240032095).
4. WHO global report on trends in prevalence of tobacco use 2000-2024 and projections 2025-2030. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2025 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240116276).
5. Implementation progress of the Regional action plan for tobacco control in the Western Pacific (2020-2030). In: Western Pacific Health Data Platform 
[website]. Data as of 17 March 2026 (https://data.wpro.who.int/implementation-progress-regional-action-plan-tobacco-control). 
6. WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic 2025: warning about the dangers of tobacco. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2025 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240112063). 
Urgent measures are necessary to prevent uptake of e-cigarettes in the Western Pacific Region
E-cigarettes used as consumer (non-therapeutic) products under real-world conditions have not been proven to be effective
for cessation at the population level. It is not recommended for governments to permit sale of e-cigarettes as consumer
products in pursuit of a cessation objective (2).
WPR/2026/DPC/001
© World Health Organization 2026
Some rights reserved. 
This work is available under 
the CC BY-NC 3.0 IGO license.
2
7 of 38 countries 
and areas have  
no regulation
18.4% 31.6%
50.0%
12 of 38 countries 
and areas have 
banned sales
19 of 38 countries and areas have 
some form of regulation