

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Exclusive breastfeeding
to reduce the risk of
childhood overweight
and obesity
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Overweight and obese children are at higher risk of developing serious health problems
including type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, asthma and other respiratory problems,
sleep disorders and liver disease. They may also suffer from psychological effects, such
as low self-esteem, depression and social isolation. Childhood obesity also increases the
risk of obesity, noncommunicable diseases, premature death and disability in
adulthood.

[page 2]
In addition to providing all the nutrients an infant needs in the first six months of life
and protecting against common childhood diseases (i.e. diarrhoea and pneumonia),
mounting evidence indicates that breastfeeding may have longer-term benefits such as
reducing the risk of overweight and obesity in childhood and adolescence.
WHO Recommendations
To achieve optimal growth, development and health, infants should be exclusively
breastfed for the first six months of life.
Thereafter, to meet their evolving nutritional requirements, infants should receive
nutritionally adequate and safe complementary foods, while continuing to breastfeed
for up to two years or beyond
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendations on Postnatal care of the mother and newborn
Baby-friendly hospital initiative: revised, updated and expanded for
integrated care
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Acceptable medical reasons for use of breast-milk substitutes
The optimal duration of exclusive breastfeeding: Report of an expert
consultation
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Optimal duration of exclusive breastfeeding
Kramer MS, Kakuma R. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2012; Issue 8. Art. No.: CD003517.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Long-term consequences of breastfeeding on cholesterol, obesity, systolic blood pressure and
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Horta BL, Loret de Mola C, Victora CG. Acta Paediatrica. 2015; 104: 30–37.
Systematic review and meta-analyses of risk factors for childhood overweight identifiable
during infancy
Weng SF, Redsell SA, Swift JA, Yang M, Glazebrook CP. Archives of Disease in Childhood. 2012; 97(12):1019-
26.
The association between breastfeeding and childhood obesity: a meta-analysis
Yan J, Liu L, Zhu Y, Huang G, Wang PP. BMC Public Health. 2014; 14:1267.

[page 4]
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 5]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO