

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Exclusive breastfeeding
for optimal growth,
development and
health of infants
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Breastfeeding has many health benefits for both the mother and infant. Breast milk
contains all the nutrients an infant needs in the first six months of life. Breastfeeding
protects against diarrhoea and common childhood illnesses such as pneumonia, and
may also have longer-term health benefits for the mother and child, such as reducing
the risk of overweight and obesity in childhood and adolescence.
Exclusive breastfeeding means that the infant receives only breast milk. No other
liquids or solids are given – not even water – with the exception of oral rehydration

[page 2]
solution, or drops/syrups of vitamins, minerals or medicines.
WHO Recommendations
Infants should be exclusively breastfed for the first six months of life to achieve optimal
growth, development and health.
Thereafter, to meet their evolving nutritional requirements, infants should receive
nutritionally adequate and safe complementary foods, while continuing to breastfeed
for up to two years or beyond.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendations on Postnatal care of the mother and newborn
Baby-friendly hospital initiative: revised, updated and expanded for
integrated care
Acceptable medical reasons for use of breast-milk substitutes
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
The optimal duration of exclusive breastfeeding: Report of an expert
consultation
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Optimal duration of exclusive breastfeeding
Kramer MS, Kakuma R. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2012; Issue 8. Art. No.: CD003517.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
The association between breastfeeding and childhood obesity: a meta-analysis
Yan J, Liu L, Zhu Y, Huang G, Wang PP. BMC Public Health. 2014; 14:1267.
Systematic review and meta-analyses of risk factors for childhood overweight identifiable
during infancy
Weng SF, Redsell SA, Swift JA, Yang M, Glazebrook CP. Archives of Disease in Childhood. 2012; 97(12):1019-
26.
Long-term consequences of breastfeeding on cholesterol, obesity, systolic blood pressure and
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Horta BL, Loret de Mola C, Victora CG. Acta Paediatrica. 2015; 104: 30–37.
Breastfeeding and intelligence: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Horta BL, Loret de Mola C, Victora CG. Acta Paediatrica. 2015; 104: 14-9.

[page 4]
Breastfeeding and maternal health outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Chowdhury R, Sinha B, Sankar MJ, Taneja S, Bhandari N, Rollins N, et al. Acta Paediatrica. 2015; 104: 96–
113.
Optimal breastfeeding practices and infant and child mortality: a systematic review and meta-
analysis
Sankar MJ, Sinha B, Chowdhury R, Bhandari N, Taneja S, Martines J, Bahl R. Acta Paediatrica. 2015; 104: 3–
13.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Scaling-up exclusive breastfeeding support programmes: the example of KwaZulu-Natal
Desmond C, Bland RM, Boyce G, Coovadia HM, Coutsoudis A, Rollins N, Newell ML. PLoS One. 2008;
3(6):e2454.
The FEeding Support Team (FEST) randomised, controlled feasibility trial of proactive and
reactive telephone support for breastfeeding women living in disadvantaged areas
Hoddinott P, Craig L, Maclennan G, Boyers D, Vale L; NHS Grampian and the University of Aberdeen FEST
Project Team BMJ Open. 2012 Apr 24;2(2):e000652.
Potential economic impacts from improving breastfeeding rates in the UK
Pokhrel S, Quigley MA, Fox-Rushby J, McCormick F, Williams A, Trueman P, et al. Arch Dis Child. 2015;
100(4):334-40.
Cost-effectiveness of peer counselling for the promotion of exclusive breastfeeding in Uganda
Chola L, Fadnes LT, Engebretsen IM, Nkonki L, Nankabirwa V, Sommerfelt H, et al. PLoS One. 2015;
10(11):e0142718.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Category 1 intervention

[page 5]
Learn More 
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO