

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Feeding of very-low-
birth-weight infants
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Every year, more than 20 million infants are born weighing less than 2.5 kg – over 96%
of them in developing countries. These low-birth-weight (LBW) infants are at increased
risk of early growth retardation, infectious disease, developmental delay and death
during infancy and childhood. Very-low-birth-weight (VLBW) infants - those infants born
weighing less than 1.5 kg - are particularly vulnerable to the these adverse outcomes.
Most LBW and VLBW is a consequence of preterm birth, small size for gestational age,
or both.
Interventions to improve the feeding of LBW and VLBW infants are likely to improve the
immediate and longer-term health and well-being of the individual infant and have a

[page 2]
significant impact on neonatal and infant mortality levels in the population.
Many of the considerations in feeding LBW infants also apply to VLBW infants, including
breastfeeding when possible, however VLBW infants also have unique nutritional needs
as described in the recommendations below.
WHO Recommendations
The recommendations below specifically address VLBW infants who are not sick
and with birth weight between 1.0 and 1.5 kg.
VLBW infants who cannot be fed mother's own milk or donor human milk should be
given preterm infant formula if they fail to gain weight despite adequate feeding with
standard infant formula.
VLBW infants who are fed mother’s own milk or donor human milk should not routinely
be given bovine milk-based human milk fortifier (recommendation relevant for
resource-limited settings).
VLBW infants who fail to gain weight despite adequate breast milk feeding should be
given human-milk fortifiers, preferably those that are human milk based.
VLBW infants should be given 10 ml/kg per day of enteral feeds, preferably expressed
breast milk, starting from the first day of life, with the remaining fluid requirement met
by intravenous fluids (recommendation relevant for resource-limited settings).
VLBW infants requiring intragastric tube feeding should be given bolus intermittent
feeds.
In VLBW infants who need to be given intragastric tube feeding, the intragastric tube
may be placed either by oral or nasal route, depending upon the preferences of health-
care providers.
In VLBW infants who need to be fed by an alternative oral feeding method or given
intragastric tube feeds, feed volumes can be increased by up to 30 ml/kg per day with
careful monitoring for feed intolerance.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Guidelines on optimal feeding of low birth-weight infants in low- and
middle-income countries
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Optimal feeding of low-birth-weight infants: technical review
Edmond K, Bahl R. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006.
Related Cochrane reviews
Delayed introduction of progressive enteral feeds to prevent necrotising enterocolitis in very
low birth weight infants
Morgan J, Young L, McGuire W.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 12. Art. No.:
CD001970.
Summary of this review 
Slow advancement of enteral feed volumes to prevent necrotising enterocolitis in very low
birth weight infants
Oddie SJ, Young L, McGuire W.\rCochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 8. Art. No.:
CD001241.
Summary of this review 
Nasal versus oral route for placing feeding tubes in preterm or low birth weight infants
Watson J, McGuire W.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD003952.
Summary of this review 
Multinutrient fortification of human breast milk for preterm infants following hospital
discharge

[page 4]
Young L, Embleton ND, McCormick FM, McGuire W.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 2.
Art. No.: CD004866.
Summary of this review 
Nutrient-enriched formula versus standard formula for preterm infants following hospital
discharge
Young L, Embleton ND, McGuire W.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 12. Art. No.:
CD004696.
Summary of this review 
Multi-nutrient fortification of human milk for preterm infants
Brown JVE, Embleton ND, Harding JE, McGuire W.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 5.
Art. No.: CD000343.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 5]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO