

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Feeding of infants
unable to breastfeed
directly in care
facilities
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Breastfeeding has many health benefits for both the mother and infant. Breast milk
contains all the nutrients an infant needs in the first six months of life. Breastfeeding
protects against diarrhoea and common childhood illnesses such as pneumonia, and
may also have longer-term health benefits such as reducing the risk of overweight and
obesity in childhood and adolescence.
While most infants born at term can breastfeed directly following birth, some term
infants and many preterm infants may not be able to do so for various reasons, and

[page 2]
require feeding by alternative methods. Such methods may include cups, spoons,
syringes, parenteral feeding tubes or feeding bottles or teats. The inability to
breastfeed directly may only be temporary, and mothers and infants should be
supported to resume or initiate breastfeeding as soon as they are able.
Evidence suggests that cups, spoons or feeding bottles and teats may be used to feed
term infants expressed breast milk or other feeds* when necessary, while cups or
spoons are preferable for preterm infants. For preterm infants, non-nutritive sucking or
oral stimulation using pacifiers, a gloved finger or a breast that is not yet producing
milk, may also decrease the time necessary to transition to full oral feeding.
* When medically indicated, a combination of expressed breast milk and other fluids, or
other fluids alone.
WHO Recommendations
Mothers should be discouraged from giving any food or fluids other than breast milk to
their infants unless medically indicated.
If expressed breast milk or other feeds are medically indicated for term infants, use of
feeding methods such as cups, spoons or feeding bottles and teats may be used during
their stay at the facility.
For preterm infants who are unable to breastfeed directly, non-nutritive sucking and
oral stimulation may be beneficial until breastfeeding is established.
If expressed breast milk or other feeds are medically indicated for preterm infants,
feeding methods such as cups or spoons are preferable to feeding bottles and teats.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding in
facilities providing maternity and newborn services
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Guidelines on optimal feeding of low birth-weight infants in low- and
middle-income countries
Implementation guidance: protecting, promoting, and supporting
breastfeeding in facilities providing maternity and newborn services:
the revised Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative 2018
Baby-friendly hospital initiative: revised, updated and expanded for
integrated care
Innocenti Declaration on the protection, promotion and support of
breastfeedingpdf, 1.65Mb
Innocenti Declaration 2005 on infant and young child feeding
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effect of restricted pacifier use in breastfeeding term infants for increasing duration of
breastfeeding

[page 4]
Jaafar SH, Ho JJ, Jahanfar S, Angolkar M.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.:
CD007202.
Summary of this review 
Cup feeding versus other forms of supplemental enteral feeding for newborn infants unable
to fully breastfeed
Flint A, New K, Davies MW.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.: CD005092.
Summary of this review 
Early additional foods and fluids for healthy breastfed full-term infants
Smith HA, Becker GE. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 8. Art. No.: CD006462.
Non-nutritive sucking for increasing physiologic stability and nutrition in preterm infants
Foster JP, Psaila K, Patterson T.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 10. Art. No.:
CD001071.
Summary of this review 
Avoidance of bottles and artificial teats during the establishment of breastfeeds in healthy
term infants: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials (publication pending)
Avoidance of bottles during the establishment of breast feeds in preterm infants
Collins CT, Gillis J, McPhee AJ, Suganuma H, Makrides M.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016,
Issue 10. Art. No.: CD005252.
Summary of this review 
Oral stimulation for promoting oral feeding in preterm infants
Greene Z, O’Donnell CPF, Walshe M.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 9. Art. No.:
CD009720.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Category 1 intervention

[page 5]
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO