

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Fluid management in
severely malnourished
children under 5 years
of age with shock
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In children who are under 5 years of age, severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very
low weight-for-height/weight-for-length or clinical signs of bilateral pitting oedema. A
very low mid-upper arm circumference also indicates severe acute malnutrition in
children who are 6–59 months of age. Severe acute malnutrition affects an estimated 19
million children under 5 years of age worldwide and is estimated to account for
approximately 400,000 child deaths each year.

[page 2]
Children with severe acute malnutrition may have difficulty keeping themselves
properly hydrated and may be unable to tolerate the rapid changes in blood volume
associated with changes in hydration status. This can lead to shock, a medical
emergency in which the organs and tissues of the body are not receiving an adequate
flow of blood. Adequately managing fluids is critical for treating shock in children with
severe acute malnutrition.
half-strength Darrow’s solution with 5% dextrose, or
Ringer’s lactate solution with 5% dextrose
WHO Recommendations
Children under 5 years of age with severe acute malnutrition and signs of shock or
severe dehydration and who cannot be rehydrated orally or by nasogastric tube should
be treated with intravenous fluids, either
If neither is available, 0.45% saline + 5% dextrose should be used.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
The treatment of diarrhoea
Diarrhoea treatment guidelines including new recommendations for
the use of ORS and zinc supplementation for clinic-based healthcare
workers
Training course on the management of severe malnutrition
Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Systematic review of the role of fluid infusions and blood transfusions in the care of
hospitalized children with severe acute malnutrition
pdf, 431kb Manary M, Trehan I. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
The effectiveness of interventions to treat severe acute malnutrition in young children: a
systematic review

[page 4]
Picot J, Hartwell D , Harris P, Mendes D, Clegg AJ, and Takeda A. Health Technology Assessment. 2012;
Vol.16:No.19(for Guideline: Updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and
children).
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria

[page 5]
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is a component of
managing children with SAM, which is
an Essential Nutrition Action targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters

[page 6]
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO