

[page 1]
Final Recommendation Statement
Folic Acid Supplementation to Prevent Neural Tube
Defects: Preventive Medication
August 01, 2023
Recommendations made by the USPSTF are independent of the U.S. government. They should not be construed as an
official position of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Recommendation Summary
Population
Recommendation
Grade
Persons who plan to or
could become pregnant
The USPSTF recommends that all persons planning to or who could become 
pregnant take a daily supplement containing 0.4 to 0.8 mg (400 to 800 mcg) 
of folic acid.
A
Pathway to Benefit
To achieve benefit, persons planning to or who could become pregnant should start daily folic acid supplementation 
at least 1 month prior to anticipated conception and continue through the first 2 to 3 months of pregnancy.
Clinician Summary
What does the USPSTF
recommend?
Persons who plan to or could become pregnant:
Take a daily supplement containing 0.4 to 0.8 mg (400 to 800 μg) of folic acid.
Grade: A
To whom does this
recommendation apply?
This recommendation applies to all persons who are planning to or could become
pregnant. It does not apply to persons who have had a previous pregnancy affected
by neural tube defects or who are at very high risk due to other factors such as family
history or those taking medication known to block the function of folic acid.
What’s new?
This recommendation is consistent with the 2017 USPSTF recommendation.
How to implement this
recommendation?  
All persons who are planning to or could become pregnant should take a daily
supplement or multivitamin containing 0.4 to 0.8 mg (400 to 800 μg) of folic acid.

[page 2]
View the Clinician Summary in PDF
Additional Information
Final Evidence Review (August 01, 2023)
Evidence Summary (August 01, 2023)
Final Research Plan (October 21, 2021)
What additional
information should
clinicians know about this
recommendation?
Supplementation should be taken daily. The critical period for folic acid
supplementation starts at least 1 month before conception and continues
through the first 2 to 3 months of pregnancy.
Nearly half of all pregnancies in the US are unplanned, meaning that many
persons may not know they are pregnant during the crucial time. To gain the
full benefits of supplementation, clinicians should advise all persons who plan
to or who could become pregnant to take a daily folic acid supplement.
Why is this
recommendation and
topic important?
Neural tube defects are caused by a failure of closure of the embryonic neural
tube, which results in birth defects of the brain, spinal cord, and overlying
tissues. The most common forms of neural tube defects are anencephaly,
encephalocele, and spina bifida.
Neural tube defects are among the most common congenital malformations
in the US, with an estimated 3000 pregnancies affected each year. Neural tube
defects can result in death and a range of disabilities affecting children.
Daily supplementation with folic acid is shown to prevent neural tube defects.
What are additional tools
and resources?
The Community Preventive Services Task Force recommends community-wide
education campaigns to promote the use of folic acid supplements among persons
of childbearing age (https://www.thecommunityguide.org/findings/pregnancy-
health-community-wide-campaigns-promote-use-folic-acid-supplements.html).
Where to read the full
recommendation
statement?
Visit the USPSTF website (https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/) or the
JAMA website (https://jamanetwork.com/collections/44068/united-states-preventive-
services-task-force) to read the full recommendation statement. This includes more
details on the rationale of the recommendation, including benefits and harms;
supporting evidence; and recommendations of others.
The USPSTF recognizes that clinical decisions involve more considerations than evidence alone. Clinicians should
understand the evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient or situation.

[page 3]
Recommendation Information
Table of Contents
PDF Version and JAMA Link
Archived Versions
Importance
USPSTF Assessment of Magnitude of Net
Benefit
Practice Considerations
Reaffirmation of Previous USPSTF
Recommendation
Supporting Evidence
Research Needs and Gaps
Recommendations of Others
Members of the US Preventive Services Task
Force
Copyright and Source Information
References
View the Recommendation in PDF
Format
To read the recommendation statement
in JAMA, select here.
To read the evidence summary in JAMA,
select here.
(January 2017)
(May 2009)
(January 1996)
Full Recommendation:
Recommendations made by the USPSTF are independent of the U.S. government. They should not be
construed as an official position of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality or the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) makes recommendations about the effectiveness of specific
preventive care services for patients without obvious related signs or symptoms to improve the health of people
nationwide. 
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of
the balance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a service in this assessment. 
The USPSTF recognizes that clinical decisions involve more considerations than evidence alone. Clinicians should
understand the evidence but individualize decision-making to the specific patient or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF
notes that policy and coverage decisions involve considerations in addition to the evidence of clinical benefits and
harms. 
The USPSTF is committed to mitigating the health inequities that prevent many people from fully benefiting from
preventive services. Systemic or structural racism results in policies and practices, including health care delivery, that
can lead to inequities in health. The USPSTF recognizes that race, ethnicity, and gender are all social rather than
biological constructs. However, they are also often important predictors of health risk. The USPSTF is committed to
helping reverse the negative impacts of systemic and structural racism, gender-based discrimination, bias, and other
sources of health inequities, and their effects on health, throughout its work.
Preamble
Importance

[page 4]
Neural tube defects are among the most common congenital malformations in the US, with an estimated 3000
pregnancies affected each year.  Many of these neural tube defects are caused by low folate levels in the body of the
pregnant person. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated that spina bifida occurs in 3.9 of 10,000
live births in the US, anencephaly in 2.5 of 10,000 live births, and encephalocele in 1 of 10,000 live births.  Neural tube
defects can result in death and a range of disabilities affecting children. Children with encephaloceles have an
increased mortality rate, with many survivors having neurologic and developmental deficits.
 Common disabilities
from spina bifida include lower limb weakness and paralysis, sensory loss, bowel and bladder dysfunction, orthopedic
abnormalities (eg, clubfoot, contractures, hip dislocation, scoliosis, or kyphosis), and ventriculomegaly (which may
require placement of ventricular-peritoneal shunts).
 Anencephaly is life-limiting in early infancy.
Folate refers to vitamin B , a water-soluble B vitamin that occurs in many chemical forms, including naturally in foods
such as leafy greens, fruits, nuts, beans, peas, seafood, eggs, dairy products, meat, and poultry.
 Folic acid is the term
applied to the synthetic form of folate that is found in supplements and added to fortified foods. Folic acid
supplementation for persons in the periconceptional period has been found to reduce the risk of neural tube defects
in offspring.
 Despite folic acid fortification of food and supplementation guidelines, folic acid deficiency remains a
concern in the US. Low levels of maternal folate may be due to inadequate dietary intake, poor intestinal absorption,
medication use that interferes with folic acid function, and impaired folate metabolism.
 Survey data from 1998 to
2016 found that approximately 20% to 40% of women who were recently pregnant or trying to get pregnant reported
taking periconceptional folic acid supplements, and those with an unintended pregnancy were 4 to 5 times less likely
to have taken periconceptional folic acid supplements.
In 2017, the USPSTF reviewed the evidence for folic acid supplementation and issued an A recommendation.
 The
USPSTF has decided to use a reaffirmation deliberation process to update this recommendation. The USPSTF uses
the reaffirmation process for well-established, evidence-based current standards of practice in primary care for which
only a very high level of evidence would justify a change in the grade of the recommendation. In its deliberation of
the evidence, the USPSTF considers whether the new evidence is of sufficient strength and quality to change its
previous conclusions about the evidence.
Using a reaffirmation process, the USPSTF concludes that, for persons who are planning to or could become
pregnant, there is high certainty that folic acid supplementation has a substantial net benefit.
See the Table for more information on the USPSTF recommendation rationale and assessment. For more details on
the methods the USPSTF uses to determine net benefit, see the USPSTF Procedure Manual.
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to persons who are planning to or could become pregnant. It does not apply to
persons who have had a previous pregnancy affected by neural tube defects or who are at very high risk because of
other factors (eg, use of certain antiseizure medications or family history). It does not apply to persons taking certain
medications known to block the function of folic acid (eg, methotrexate, carbamazepine, and valproic acid).
1
2
3-5
6-8
9
9
10
11,12
10
10
USPSTF Assessment of Magnitude of Net Benefit
12
13
Practice Considerations

[page 5]
Definitions
Neural tube defects are caused by a failure of closure of the embryonic neural tube, which results in birth defects of
the brain, spinal cord, and overlying tissues. The most common forms of neural tube defects are anencephaly,
encephalocele, and spina bifida.
 Anencephaly occurs when the cranial portion of the neural tube fails to close.
Affected infants are born without portions of the brain and skull. Anencephaly is life-limiting in early infancy.
Encephalocele occurs when cranial defects allow portions of the brain and meninges to protrude. Spina bifida is a
group of conditions that vary in severity and include myelomeningocele (protrusion of the spinal cord and meninges
through a spinal defect), meningocele (protrusion of meninges through a spinal defect), and spina bifida occulta
(spinal defect without any protrusion).
Assessment of Risk
All pregnancies are at risk for neural tube defects, and persons who are planning to or could become pregnant
should take folic acid supplements. Certain risk factors convey a higher risk, and individuals with these risk factors
should talk to their health care professional. These factors include personal, partner, or family history of neural tube
defects, malabsorption caused by bariatric procedures, the use of certain antiseizure medicines, and genetic
mutations in folate-related enzymes.
 Pregestational diabetes and obesity have been associated with an
increased risk of neural tube defects.
 Ethnic groups such as First Nation persons in Canada and Hispanic persons
in California are thought to be at higher risk of neural tube defects.
 It is unclear, however, whether this is related
to a higher risk of genetic variations among these groups or due to differential intake of folic acid–fortified foods.
Timing
The neural plate completes its formation and closure early in pregnancy (usually 26 to 28 days after fertilization).
This means the critical period for folic acid supplementation starts at least 1 month before conception and continues
through the first 2 to 3 months of pregnancy. Nearly half of all pregnancies in the US are unplanned; to gain the full
benefits of supplementation, clinicians should advise all persons who plan to or who could become pregnant to take
daily folic acid.
Dosage
Good evidence from studies in settings without fortification of food suggests that an over-the-counter multivitamin
with between 0.4 mg (400 μg) (the generally available dose) and 0.8 mg (800 μg) of folic acid daily reduces the risk
for neural tube defects.
 Clinical practice guidelines from professional medical and public health organizations
recommend a minimum folic acid supplemental daily intake of 400 μg for all persons who are planning a pregnancy
or could become pregnant.
Since 1998, specific enriched cereal grain products in the US have been fortified with folic acid. In 2016, the US Food
and Drug Administration began allowing corn masa flour to be voluntarily fortified with folic acid.
 Evidence shows
that persons who may become pregnant are not consuming fortified foods at a quantity to provide optimal benefit
for prevention of neural tube defects.
 Therefore, all persons planning to or who could become pregnant should
take a daily supplement of at least 400 ug.
Additional Tools and Resources
The Community Preventive Services Task Force recommends community-wide education campaigns to promote the
use of folic acid supplements among persons of childbearing age
(https://www.thecommunityguide.org/findings/pregnancy-health-community-wide-campaigns-promote-use-folic-
14
10
15-19
20,21
22,23
10
17
24
10,12
25-28
10
12,29

[page 6]
acid-supplements.html).
This recommendation is a reaffirmation of the USPSTF 2017 recommendation statement. In 2017, the USPSTF
reviewed the evidence for folic acid supplementation to prevent neural tube defects and found convincing evidence
that the benefits of supplementation substantially outweighed the harms (A recommendation).
 In the current
update, the USPSTF found no new substantial evidence that could change its recommendation and, therefore,
reaffirms its recommendation that all persons planning to or who could become pregnant take a daily supplement
of folic acid.
Scope of Review
To reaffirm its recommendation, the USPSTF commissioned a reaffirmation evidence update.
 The aim of
evidence updates that support the reaffirmation process is to identify new and substantial evidence sufficient to
change the prior recommendation.
 The reaffirmation update focuses on targeted key questions on the benefits
and harms of folic acid supplementation.
Benefits of Folic Acid Supplementation
In 2017, the USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the benefits of folic acid supplementation to prevent neural tube
defects and found convincing evidence that the benefits of supplementation were significant. Three fair-quality
observational studies (reported in 4 publications) published since the last USPSTF recommendation reported on the
association between folic acid supplementation and neural tube defects (n = 990,372).
 Two cohort studies were
in populations without food fortification (Norway and Japan) and the third was a case-control study set in the US and
Canada prior to and after the introduction of food fortification.
 The Norwegian cohort study (n = 896,674 live
births and stillborn infants) reported results by time periods (1999-2005, 2006-2013, and overall, 1999-2013).
 In
Norway, folic acid supplementation was first recommended in 1999 and folic acid was not included in most
multivitamins until 2004. The authors hypothesized that the study periods corresponded to lesser (1999-2005) and
greater (2006-2013) adherence to recommendations regarding folic acid supplementation. The study reported a
statistically significant reduction in neural tube defects in women taking folic acid supplementation in the period
corresponding to greater adherence (2006 to 2013) but not in other periods. The Japanese cohort (n = 92,269)
compared adequate users of folic acid supplements (started before conception) with inadequate users (started after
pregnancy recognition or nonuse of folic acid supplements). Neural tube defect outcomes included spina bifida,
anencephaly, and encephalocele. The study reported no statistically significant differences associated with folic acid
supplementation.
 Both cohort studies drew from general populations. The case-control study set in the US and
Canada in the period following food fortification focused on high-risk participants. A subgroup of participants (123
cases and 1306 controls) with pregestational diabetes and prepregnancy obesity was included in the review. This
study reported no statistically significant associations between daily or less than daily folic acid supplementation,
compared with no supplementation, and neural tube defects.
The USPSTF also reviewed data on whether the benefits of folic acid supplementation differ by timing. In the
previously mentioned Norwegian study, there was no effect of folic acid supplementation regardless of the timing of
folic acid supplementation in the period corresponding to lesser adherence (1999-2005) and in the overall period
Reaffirmation of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
12
Supporting Evidence
10,30
13
10,30
10,30
31,32
33
34

[page 7]
(1999-2013). In the second period (2006-2013), the results demonstrated a benefit of folic acid supplementation
regardless of timing (before pregnancy only: adjusted relative risk [aRR], 0.54 [95% CI, 0.31-0.91]; before and during
pregnancy: aRR, 0.49 [95% CI, 0.29-0.83]; and during pregnancy only: aRR, 0.62 [95% CI, 0.39-0.97]).
Harms of Folic Acid Supplementation
In 2017, the USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the harms of folic acid supplementation to prevent neural tube defects
and found adequate evidence that folic acid supplementation at usual doses is not associated with serious harms. Six
fair-quality cohort studies and 1 fair-quality case-control study published since the 2017 USPSTF recommendation
examined the potential association between folic acid supplementation and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (n =
761,125).
 No study reported statistically significant associations between supplementation and increased risk of
ASD. Two studies reported statistically significant reductions of autism associated with folic acid supplementation.
Other studies in similar geographic settings or populations that used different measures of exposure or comparators
reported no association between folic acid supplementation and autism. Three studies reported on associations
between folic acid supplementation and ASD by dose and found no differences. Two studies reported on associations
between folic acid supplementation and ASD by timing. Neither reported harms; however, 1 study reported a
statistically significant reduction of ASD associated with folic acid supplementation initiation in weeks 5 to 8 of the
pregnancy.
One high-quality trial reported on the differences in twin deliveries based on the dose of folic acid. It found no
differences between an exposure of 4 mg vs 0.4 mg of folic acid daily. No studies reported on the overall risk, timing,
or duration of twin gestations and folic acid supplementation.
 One cohort study (n = 429,004) found no
association between folic acid supplementation and maternal cancer.
How Does Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
Adequate maternal folate levels are important in preventing neural tube defects; however, the mechanism by which
folate reduces this risk is not well understood. Folate is necessary for nucleotide synthesis and DNA and RNA
function.
 Inadequate folate levels impair nucleotide synthesis and DNA and RNA replication and may lead to
incomplete neural folds and subsequent neural tube defects.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for public comment on the USPSTF website from
February 21, 2023, to March 20, 2023. Most comments agreed with the conclusions of the USPSTF. Commenters
requested additional information on the dosage of folic acid. The USPSTF wishes to clarify that the generally available
dosage for folic acid supplementation is between 0.4 and 0.8 mg daily. The most common dosages from the
included studies were in this range. Women at higher risk of neural tube defects may require dosages above this
range and should speak with their clinician about this. Based on comments, the USPSTF also included information
on naturally occurring sources of folate.
Studies are needed that provide more information on the following.
More research is needed to better understand how genetic variants such as
MTHFR slow folate metabolism and how these variants affect strategies for folic
acid supplementation.
10,30
10,30
10,30
10,30
10,30
10
Research Needs and Gaps

[page 8]
More research is needed on the effectiveness of folic acid supplementation in
reducing neural tube defects among those disproportionately affected by the
condition, including Hispanic persons.
More research is needed on factors that contribute to variations in adherence to
supplementation.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Family Physicians, and American
Academy of Pediatrics all recommend folic acid supplementation of 400 μg (0.4 mg) per day for persons of
reproductive age who are planning to become pregnant and are at average risk of neural tube defects (ie, without a
prior pregnancy with a neural tube defect).
The US Preventive Services Task Force members include the following individuals: Michael J. Barry, MD (Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts); Wanda K. Nicholson, MD, MPH, MBA (George Washington University,
Washington, DC); Michael Silverstein, MD, MPH (Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island); David Chelmow, MD
(Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond); Tumaini Rucker Coker, MD, MBA (University of Washington, Seattle);
Esa M. Davis, MD, MPH (University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore); Katrina E. Donahue, MD, MPH
(University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill); Carlos Roberto Jaén, MD, PhD, MS (University of Texas Health Science
Center, San Antonio); Li Li, MD, PhD, MPH (University of Virginia, Charlottesville); Gbenga Ogedegbe, MD, MPH (New
York University, New York, New York); Goutham Rao, MD (Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio); John M.
Ruiz, PhD (University of Arizona, Tucson); James Stevermer, MD, MSPH (University of Missouri, Columbia); Joel Tsevat,
MD, MPH (University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio); Sandra Millon Underwood, PhD, RN (University of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee); John B. Wong, MD (Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts).
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Authors followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest described at
https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/about-uspstf/conflict-interest-disclosures. All members of the USPSTF
receive travel reimbursement and an honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent, voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted in the following: development and review of the research plan,
commission of the systematic evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice Center, coordination of expert
review and public comment of the draft evidence report and draft recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had no role in the
approval of the final recommendation statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the USPSTF are independent of the US government. They should not be
construed as an official position of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and Human Services.
Recommendations of Others
25-27
Members of the US Preventive Services Task Force
Copyright and Source Information

[page 9]
Additional Information: Published by JAMA®—Journal of the American Medical Association under arrangement
with the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). ©2023 AMA and United States Government, as
represented by the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), by assignment from the
members of the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). All rights reserved.
Copyright Notice: USPSTF recommendations are based on a rigorous review of existing peer-reviewed evidence and
are intended to help primary care clinicians and patients decide together whether a preventive service is right for a
patient's needs. To encourage widespread discussion, consideration, adoption, and implementation of USPSTF
recommendations, AHRQ permits members of the public to reproduce, redistribute, publicly display, and incorporate
USPSTF work into other materials provided that it is reproduced without any changes to the work of portions thereof,
except as permitted as fair use under the US Copyright Act.
AHRQ and the US Department of Health and Human Services cannot endorse, or appear to endorse, derivative or
excerpted materials, and they cannot be held liable for the content or use of adapted products that are incorporated
on other Web sites. Any adaptations of these electronic documents and resources must include a disclaimer to this
effect. Advertising or implied endorsement for any commercial products or services is strictly prohibited.
This work may not be reproduced, reprinted, or redistributed for a fee, nor may the work be sold for profit or
incorporated into a profit-making venture without the express written permission of AHRQ. This work is subject to
the restrictions of Section 1140 of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. §320b-10. When parts of a recommendation
statement are used or quoted, the USPSTF Web page should be cited as the source.
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Spina bifida and anencephaly before and after folic acid
mandate--United States, 1995-1996 and 1999-2000. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2004;53(17):362-365.
2. Mai CT, Isenburg JL, Canfield MA, et al; National Birth Defects Prevention Network. National population-based
estimates for major birth defects, 2010-2014. Birth Defects Res. 2019;111(18):1420-1435.
3. Markovic I, Bosnjakovic P, Milenkovic Z. Occipital encephalocele: cause, incidence, neuroimaging and surgical
management. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2020;16(3):200-205.
4. Encephalocele. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published March 11, 2021. Accessed June 15, 2023.
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/surveillancemanual/quick-reference-handbook/encephalocele.html
5. Huang SB, Doherty D. Congenital malformations of the central nervous system. In: Gleason CA, Juul SE , eds. Avery’s
Diseases of the Newborn. 10th ed. Elsevier; 2018: 857-878.
6. Spina bifida. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published March 11, 2021. Accessed June 15, 2023.
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/surveillancemanual/quick-reference-handbook/spinaBifida.html
7. Mitchell LE, Adzick NS, Melchionne J, et al. Spina bifida. Lancet. 2004;364(9448):1885-1895.
8. Wiener JS, Suson KD, Castillo J; National Spina Bifida Patient Registry. Bladder management and continence
outcomes in adults with spina bifida: results from the National Spina Bifida Patient Registry, 2009 to 2015. J Urol.
2018;200(1):187-194.
9. Anencephaly. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published March 10, 2021. Accessed June 15, 2023.
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/surveillancemanual/quick-reference-handbook/anencephaly.html
10. Viswanathan M, Urrutia RP, Hudson KN, Middleton JC, Kahwati LC. Folic Acid Supplementation to Prevent Neural
Tube Defects: A Limited Systematic Review Update for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Evidence Synthesis No.
230. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2023. AHRQ publication 22-05302-EF-1.
11. MRC Vitamin Study Research Group. Prevention of neural tube defects: results of the Medical Research Council
Vitamin Study. Lancet. 1991;338(8760):131-137.
12. US Preventive Services Task Force. Folic acid supplementation for the prevention of neural tube defects: US
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA. 2017;317(2):183-189.
13. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Procedure Manual. US Preventive Services Task Force. Published May 2021.
Accessed June 15, 2023. https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/about-uspstf/methods-and-
processes/procedure-manual
References

[page 10]
14. Congenital anomalies of the nervous system: neural tube defects. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Published March 10, 2021. Accessed June 15, 2023.
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/surveillancemanual/quick-reference-handbook/neuralTubeDefects.html
15. Hernández-Díaz S, Werler MM, Walker AM, Mitchell AA. Neural tube defects in relation to use of folic acid
antagonists during pregnancy. Am J Epidemiol. 2001;153(10):961-968.
16. Agopian AJ, Tinker SC, Lupo PJ, Canfield MA, Mitchell LE; National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Proportion of
neural tube defects attributable to known risk factors. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2013;97(1):42-46.
17. Greene ND, Copp AJ. Neural tube defects. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2014;37:221-242.
18. El Khoury L, Benvenga R, Roussel J, et al. Fetal spina bifida in a pregnant woman following omega gastric bypass:
case report and literature review. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2020;70:137-139.
19. Li J, Feng D, He S, Yang H, Su Z, Ye H. Association of MTHFR 677C > T gene polymorphism with neonatal defects: a
meta-analysis of 81444 subjects. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2022;42(6):1811-1822.
20. Garne E, Loane M, Dolk H, et al. Spectrum of congenital anomalies in pregnancies with pregestational diabetes.
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2012;94(3):134-40.
21. Racusin D, Stevens B, Campbell G, Aagaard KM. Obesity and the risk and detection of fetal malformations. Semin
Perinatol. 2012;36(3):213-221.
22. Ray JG, Vermeulen MJ, Meier C, Cole DE, Wyatt PR. Maternal ethnicity and risk of neural tube defects: a
population-based study. CMAJ. 2004;171(4):343-345.
23. Feuchtbaum L, Currier RJ, Riggle S, Roberson M, Lorey FW, Cunningham JC. Neural tube defect prevalence in
California (1990-1994): eliciting patterns by type of defect and maternal race/ethnicity. Genet Test. 1999;3(3):265-272.
24. Finer LB, Zolna MR. Declines in unintended pregnancy in the United States, 2008-2011. N Engl J Med.
2016;374(9):843-852.
25. ACOG committee opinion No. 762: prepregnancy counseling. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. Published January 2019. Accessed June 15, 2023. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-
guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2019/01/prepregnancy-counseling
26. American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Genetics. Folic acid for the prevention of neural tube defects.
Pediatrics. 1999;104(2 Pt 1):325-327.
27. Clinical preventive service recommendation: neural tube defects. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Accessed June 15, 2023. https://www.aafp.org/family-physician/patient-care/clinical-recommendations/all-clinical-
recommendations/neural-tube-defects.html
28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:
recommendations for use of folic acid to reduce number of spina bifida cases and other neural tube defects. JAMA.
1993;269(10):1233, 1236-1238.
29. Folic acid. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. June 15, 2022. Accessed June 15, 2023.
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/folicacid/about.html
30. Viswanathan M, Urrutia RP, Hudson KN, Middleton JC, Kahwati LC. Folic acid supplementation to prevent neural
tube defects: updated evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA.
Published August 1, 2023.
31. Gildestad T, Øyen N, Klungsøyr K, Nilsen RM, Daltveit AK, Vollset SE. Maternal use of folic acid supplements and
infant risk of neural tube defects in Norway 1999-2013. Scand J Public Health. 2016;44(6):619-626.
32.  Gildestad T, Bjørge T, Haaland ØA, Klungsøyr K, Vollset SE, Øyen N. Maternal use of folic acid and multivitamin
supplements and infant risk of birth defects in Norway, 1999-2013. Br J Nutr. 2020;124(3):316-329.
33. Nishigori H, Obara T, Nishigori T, et al; Japan Environment & Children’s Study Group. Preconception folic acid
supplementation use and the occurrence of neural tube defects in Japan: a nationwide birth cohort study of the
Japan Environment and Children’s Study. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2019;59(4):110-117.
34. Petersen JM, Parker SE, Benedum CM, Mitchell AA, Tinker SC, Werler MM. Periconceptional folic acid and risk for
neural tube defects among higher risk pregnancies. Birth Defects Res. 2019;111(19):1501-1512.
Table. Summary of USPSTF Rationale

[page 11]
Rationale
Assessment
Benefits of intervention
and treatment
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that supplements containing 0.4 to 0.8 mg
(400 to 800 μg) of folic acid taken in the periconceptional period reduce the risk for
neural tube defects.
Harms of early detection
and intervention and
treatment
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that folic acid supplementation at usual doses
is not associated with serious harms.
USPSTF assessment
Using a reaffirmation deliberation process, the USPSTF concludes with high certainty
that for persons who are planning to or who could become pregnant, the net benefit
of folic acid supplementation is substantial.
Abbreviation: USPSTF, US Preventive Services Task Force.