

[page 1]
Foods and Drinks to Encourage
AT A GLANCE
Beginning around 6 months, your child needs a variety of foods and drinks for proper
growth and development. Healthy eating patterns that your child starts now will help
promote healthy eating habits in the future.
Foods to encourage
Offer your child a variety of vegetables, fruits, protein, dairy without added sugars, healthy fats, and whole grains cut into small, bite-sized
pieces. Consider making a rainbow of different-colored foods on your child's plate. Here are a few examples:
Vegetables: cooked spinach, carrots, beans, peas, lentils, sweet potatoes, or beets.
Fruits: bananas, strawberries, pears, oranges, melons, or avocados.
Proteins: soft, small pieces of beef, lamb, chicken, fish, turkey, eggs, or tofu.
Dairy without added sugars: pasteurized cheeses or yogurts, including fortified dairy alternatives.
Whole grains: whole grain breads, crackers, or pastas.
Once your child is 12 months old, they may be eating more of the foods that you eat. Eating a healthy diet sets a good example for your child.
Continue to offer a variety of healthy options and allow your child to choose foods to eat.
Drinks to encourage
If your child is between 6 and 12 months old, you can offer them:
Breast milk (if you are breastfeeding) or infant formula.
Water (4 to 8 ounces a day).
Cow’s milk and milk alternatives
Once your child is 12 months old, you can begin offering pasteurized, plain whole cow's milk without added sugars or fortified, unsweetened
dairy alternatives.
Starting solid foods
It is important to provide foods that match your child's eating skills. At first, foods may need to be soft and mashed or bite-sized. Visit
Tastes and Textures for more information.
When your child is 6 to 12 months, some types of foods and drinks are better for your child than others. Watch these videos from 1,000
Days.

APR. 1, 2026
For Everyone
Infant and Toddler Nutrition

[page 2]
SOURCES
CONTENT SOURCE:
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (NCCDPHP)