

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Fortification of maize
flour and corn meal
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Fortification is the practice of deliberately increasing the content of an essential
micronutrient, i.e. vitamins and minerals (including trace elements) in a food, so as to
improve the nutritional quality of the food supply and provide a public health benefit
with minimal risk to health.
Maize, also referred to as corn, is cultivated in most parts of the world, as it grows in
diverse climates. Maize is an important cereal crop and together with wheat and rice
account for 94% of total cereal consumption worldwide.
Industrial fortification of maize flour and corn meal with at least iron has been practised
for many years in several countries in the Americas and Africa, where these ingredients

[page 2]
are used in the preparation of many common national dishes. When appropriately
implemented, fortification is an efficient, simple and inexpensive strategy for supplying
vitamins and minerals to the diets of large segments of the population.
WHO Recommendations
Fortification of maize flour and corn meal with iron is recommended to prevent iron
deficiency in populations, particularly vulnerable groups such as children and women.
Fortification of maize flour and corn meal with folic acid is recommended to reduce the
risk of occurrence of births with neural tube defects.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Fortification of maize flour and corn meal with vitamins and minerals
Recommendations on wheat and maize flour fortification meeting
report: interim consensus statement
Guidelines on food fortification with micronutrients
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Fortification of wheat and maize flour with folic acid for population health outcomes
(protocol)
De-Regil LM, Finkelstein JL, Sæterdal I, Gaitán D, Peña-Rosas JP. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2016; Issue 4. Art. No.: CD012150. (Review has been submitted for publication)
Global birth prevalence of spina bifida by folic acid fortification status: a systematic review
and meta-analysis
Atta CA, Fiest KM, Frolkis AD, Jette N, Pringsheim T, St Germaine-Smith C et al. Am J Public Health.
2016;106:e24–34.
Fortification of staple foods with zinc for improving zinc status and other health outcomes in
the general population
Shah D, Sachdev HS, Gera T, De-Regil LM, Peña-Rosas JP.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016,
Issue 6. Art. No.: CD010697.
Summary of this review 
Micronutrient fortification of food and its impact on woman and child health: a systematic
review
Das JK, Salam RA, Kumar R, Bhutta ZA. Syst Rev 2013;2:67–93.
Fortification of staple foods with vitamin A for preventing vitamin A deficiency (protocol)
Hombali AS, Venkatesh BT, Nair S, Peña-Rosas JP. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2012; Issue 9.
Art. No.: CD010068. (Update has been submitted for publication)
Fortification of maize flour with iron for preventing anaemia and iron deficiency in
populations
Garcia-Casal MN, Peña-Rosas JP, De-Regil LM, Gwirtz JA, Pasricha SR. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 2018, Issue 12. Art. No.: CD010187.
Effect of iron-fortified foods on hematologic and biological outcomes: systematic review of
randomized controlled trials
Gera T, Sachdev H, Boy E. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;96:309–24.

[page 4]
Other related systematic reviews
Evidence of the effectiveness of flour fortification programs on iron status and anemia: a
systematic review
Pachón H, Spohrer R, Mei Z, Serdula MK. Nutrition Reviews. 2015; 73(11):780-95.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Reevaluating the Benefits of Folic Acid Fortification in the United States: Economic Analysis,
Regulation, and Public Health
Grosse SD, Waitzman NJ, Romano PS, Mulinare J. Am J Public Health. 2005; 95(11):1917-22.
A strategic approach to the unfinished fortification agenda: Feasibility, costs, and cost-
effectiveness analysis of fortification programs in 48 countries
Fiedler JL, Macdonald B. Food Nutr Bull. 2009; 30(4):283-316.
Retrospective Assessment of Cost Savings From Prevention
Grosse SD, Berry RJ, Mick Tilford J, Kucik JE, Waitzman NJ. Am J Prev Med. 2016; 50(5 Suppl 1):S74-S80.
Iron fortification and iron supplementation are cost-effective interventions to reduce iron
deficiency in four subregions of the world
Baltussen R, Knai C, Sharan M. J Nutr. 2004; 134(10):2678-84.
Decline in the prevalence of neural tube defects following folic acid fortification and its cost-
benefit in South Africa
Sayed AR, Bourne D, Pattinson R, Nixon J, Henderson B. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008;
82(4):211-6.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Category 1 intervention

[page 5]
Learn More 
This intervention is an Essential
Nutrition Action targeting the first 1000
days of life.
Learn More 
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO