

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Fortification of rice
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Fortification is the practice of deliberately increasing the content of an essential
micronutrient, i.e. vitamins and minerals (including trace elements) in a food, so as to
improve the nutritional quality of the food supply and provide a public health benefit
with minimal risk to health.
Rice is cultivated in many parts of the world, as it grows in diverse climates. Industrial
fortification of rice with vitamins and minerals has been practised for many years in
several countries throughout the world, where rice is a staple consumed regularly in the
preparation of many common local dishes. Micronutrient deficiencies of public health
significance are widespread in most countries consuming high levels of rice; thus rice
fortification has the potential to help aid vulnerable populations that are currently not
reached by wheat or maize flour fortification programmes. However, rice production is

[page 2]
often done domestically or locally which could make reaching all those in need with
mass fortification programs challenging.
Rice can be fortified by adding a micronutrient powder to the rice that adheres to the
grains or spraying of the surface of ordinary rice grains in several layers with a vitamin
and mineral mix to form a protective coating. Rice can also be extruded and shaped
into partially precooked grain-like structures resembling rice grains, which can then be
blended with natural polished rice. Rice kernels can be fortified with several
micronutrients, such as iron, folic acid and other B-complex vitamins, vitamin A and
zinc.
WHO Recommendations
Fortification of rice with iron is recommended as a public health strategy to improve the
iron status of populations, in settings where rice is a staple food.*
Fortification of rice with vitamin A may be used as a public health strategy to improve
the iron status and vitamin A nutrition of populations.
Fortification of rice with folic acid may be used as a public health strategy to improve
the folate nutritional status of populations.
* A staple food, or simply a staple, is a food that is consumed regularly and provides an
important proportion of the energy (calories) and nutrient requirements. Its
preparation is variable in different contexts and is closely linked to the most available
foods in each setting.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: fortification of rice with vitamins and minerals as a public
health strategy
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Guidelines on food fortification with micronutrients
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Fortification of rice with vitamins and minerals for addressing micronutrient malnutrition
Peña‐Rosas JP, Mithra P, Unnikrishnan B, Kumar N, De‐Regil LM, Nair NS, Garcia‐Casal MN, Solon JA.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019; Issue 10. Art. No.: CD009902.
Learn More 
Cost-effectivess
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Retrospective Assessment of Cost Savings From Prevention
Grosse SD, Berry RJ, Mick Tilford J, Kucik JE, Waitzman NJ. Am J Prev Med. 2016; 50(5 Suppl 1):S74-S80.
Reevaluating the Benefits of Folic Acid Fortification in the United States: Economic Analysis,
Regulation, and Public Health
Grosse SD, Waitzman NJ, Romano PS, Mulinare J. Am J Public Health. 2005; 95(11):1917-22.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO