

[page 1]
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health
Grape Seed Extract
Common Names: grape seed extract
Latin Names: Vitis vinifera
Background
Grape seed extract, which is made from the seeds of wine
grapes, is promoted as a dietary supplement for various
purposes, including reducing blood cholesterol and blood
pressure, and as an ingredient in topical products for promoting
wound healing and preventing tooth decay.
Grape seed extract contains proanthocyanidins, which have a
variety of effects that might be beneficial in managing health
conditions.
How Much Do We Know?
There are some well-controlled studies of people using grape
seed extract dietary supplements for certain health conditions,
particularly high blood cholesterol levels and high blood pressure.
Not much is known about grape seed extract’s effects on other
conditions.
What Have We Learned?
A 2020 review of 11 studies (536 participants) showed that grape
seed extract may have desirable effects on levels of low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and triglycerides but not on total
cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels.
These conclusions should not be considered definite because the
studies were small, and the composition of the products varied
from study to study.
An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know
© Thinkstock

[page 2]
A 2022 review of 19 studies (1,080 participants) showed that
grape seed extract reduced diastolic blood pressure (the lower
number in a blood pressure reading) but not systolic blood
pressure (the higher number). Results of individual studies
differed, and the differences may have been related to the dose
and duration of grape seed extract supplementation and
characteristics of the study participants.
Studies in experimental models suggest that application of grape
seed extract to the skin may promote wound healing, but only a
very small amount of research has been done on this topic in
people, and there isn’t enough evidence to conclude whether
grape seed extract is helpful for this purpose.
Although laboratory studies suggest that grape seed extract, used
in a mouthrinse, might help to prevent tooth decay, there hasn’t
been enough research in people to allow its effects to be
evaluated.
What Do We Know About Safety?
Grape seed extract is generally well tolerated when taken orally or
used topically. 
If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care
provider before using grape seed extract or other herbal products;
some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways.
Little is known about whether it’s safe to use grape seed extract
during pregnancy or while breastfeeding.
Keep in Mind
Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers
about any complementary health approaches you use. Together,
you can make shared, well-informed decisions.

[page 3]
Federal Regulation of Herbal Products
Depending on what's in them, how they're intended to be
used, and how they're administered (orally or topically),
herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many
herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary
supplements. The rules for making and distributing dietary
supplements are less strict than those for drugs.
Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold
to the public. When public health concerns arise about the
safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an
herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public.
Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are
responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their
products before marketing to ensure that they meet all
regulatory requirements. 
For More Information
Using Dietary Supplements Wisely
Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can
Interact
Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal
Article
NCCIH Clearinghouse
The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and
complementary and integrative health approaches, including
publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and
medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical
advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners.
Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226
Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1
Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov
Email: info@nccih.nih.gov
PubMed®
A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains
publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles
from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on
using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary
Health Practices on PubMed.
Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

[page 4]
Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of
Health (NIH)
ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary
supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research,
sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources
include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To
Know) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients
and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral
supplements).
Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov
Email: ods@nih.gov
Key References
Anjom-Shoae J, Milajerdi A, Larijani B, et al. Effects of grape seed
extract on dyslipidaemia: a systematic review and dose-response
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. British Journal of
Nutrition. 2020;124(2):121-134.
Foshati S, Nouripour F, Sadeghi E, et al. The effect of grape (Vitis
vinifera) seed extract supplementation on flow-mediated dilation,
blood pressure, and heart rate: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of controlled trials with duration- and dose-response
analysis. Pharmacological Research. 2022;175:105905.
García-Manríquez N, Lozano C, Muñoz A, et al. Anticaries properties of
natural berries: systematic literature review. Nutrition Reviews.
2024;82(3):302-317.
Grape. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at
naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on January 19, 2024.
[Database subscription].
Gupta M, Dey S, Marbaniang D, et al. Grape seed extract: having a
potential health benefits. Journal of Food Science and
Technology. 2020;57(4):1205-1215.
Mancini M, Cerny MEV, Cardoso NS, et al. Grape seed components as
protectors of inflammation, DNA damage, and cancer. Current
Nutrition Reports. 2023;12:141-150.
Sochorova L, Prusova B, Cebova M, et al. Health effects of grape seed
and skin extracts and their influence on biochemical markers.
Molecules. 2020;25(22):5311.

[page 5]
This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain.
Duplication is encouraged.
NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended
to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care
provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment
or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product,
service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH.
Last Updated: February 2025