

[page 1]
Q&A on the carcinogenicity of the consumption of red meat and processed meat 
 
 
 
Q. What do you consider as red meat? 
 
A. Red meat refers to all mammalian muscle meat, including, beef, veal, pork, lamb, mutton, 
horse, and goat. 
 
Q. What do you consider as processed meat? 
 
A. Processed meat refers to meat that has been transformed through salting, curing, 
fermentation, smoking, or other processes to enhance flavour or improve preservation. Most 
processed meats contain pork or beef, but processed meats may also contain other red meats, 
poultry, offal, or meat by-products such as blood. 
 
Examples of processed meat include hot dogs (frankfurters), ham, sausages, corned beef, and 
biltong or beef jerky as well as canned meat and meat-based preparations and sauces. 
 
Q. Why did IARC choose to evaluate red meat and processed meat? 
 
A. An international advisory committee that met in 2014 recommended red meat and processed 
meat as high priorities for evaluation by the IARC Monographs Programme. This 
recommendation was based on epidemiological studies suggesting that small increases in the 
risk of several cancers may be associated with high consumption of red meat or processed 
meat. Although these risks are small, they could be important for public health because many 
people worldwide eat meat and meat consumption is increasing in low- and middle-income 
countries. Although some health agencies already recommend limiting intake of meat, these 
recommendations are aimed mostly at reducing the risk of other diseases. With this in mind, it 
was important for IARC to provide authoritative scientific evidence on the cancer risks 
associated with eating red meat and processed meat. 
 
Q. Do methods of cooking meat change the risk? 
 
A. High-temperature cooking methods generate compounds that may contribute to carcinogenic 
risk, but their role is not yet fully understood. 
 
Q. What are the safest methods of cooking meat (e.g. sautéing, boiling, broiling, or 
barbecuing)? 
 
A. Cooking at high temperatures or with the food in direct contact with a flame or a hot surface, 
as in barbecuing or pan-frying, produces more of certain types of carcinogenic chemicals (such 
as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and heterocyclic aromatic amines). However, there were 
not enough data for the IARC Working Group to reach a conclusion about whether the way meat 
is cooked affects the risk of cancer. 
 
Q. Is eating raw meat safer? 
 
A. There were no data to address this question in relation to cancer risk. However, the separate 
question of risk of infection from consumption of raw meat needs to be kept in mind.

[page 2]
Page 2 
 
 
Q&A on the carcinogenicity of the consumption of red meat and processed meat 
 
IARC, 150 Cours Albert Thomas, 69372 Lyon CEDEX 08, France - Tel: +33 (0)4 72 73 84 85 - Fax: +33 (0)4 72 73 85 75 
© IARC 2015 - All Rights Reserved. 
 
 
Q. Red meat was classified as Group 2A, probably carcinogenic to humans. What does 
this mean exactly? 
 
A. In the case of red meat, the classification is based on limited evidence from epidemiological 
studies showing positive associations between eating red meat and developing colorectal cancer 
as well as strong mechanistic evidence. 
 
Limited evidence means that a positive association has been observed between exposure to the 
agent and cancer but that other explanations for the observations (technically termed chance, 
bias, or confounding) could not be ruled out. 
 
Q. Processed meat was classified as Group 1, carcinogenic to humans. What does this 
mean? 
 
A. This category is used when there is sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in humans. In other 
words, there is convincing evidence that the agent causes cancer. The evaluation is usually 
based on epidemiological studies showing the development of cancer in exposed humans. 
 
In the case of processed meat, this classification is based on sufficient evidence from 
epidemiological studies that eating processed meat causes colorectal cancer. 
 
Q. Processed meat was classified as carcinogenic to humans (Group 1). Tobacco 
smoking and asbestos are also both classified as carcinogenic to humans (Group 1). 
Does it mean that consumption of processed meat is as carcinogenic as tobacco 
smoking and asbestos? 
 
A. No, processed meat has been classified in the same category as causes of cancer such as 
tobacco smoking and asbestos (IARC Group 1, carcinogenic to humans), but this does NOT 
mean that they are all equally dangerous. The IARC classifications describe the strength of the 
scientific evidence about an agent being a cause of cancer, rather than assessing the level of 
risk.  
 
Q. What types of cancers are linked or associated with eating red meat? 
 
A. The strongest, but still limited, evidence for an association with eating red meat is for 
colorectal cancer. There is also evidence of links with pancreatic cancer and prostate cancer. 
 
Q. What types of cancers are linked or associated with eating processed meat? 
 
A. The IARC Working Group concluded that eating processed meat causes colorectal cancer. 
An association with stomach cancer was also seen, but the evidence is not conclusive. 
 
Q. How many cancer cases every year can be attributed to consumption of processed 
meat and red meat? 
 
A. According to the most recent estimates by the Global Burden of Disease Project, an 
independent academic research organization, about 34 000 cancer deaths per year worldwide 
are attributable to diets high in processed meat.

[page 3]
Page 3 
 
 
Q&A on the carcinogenicity of the consumption of red meat and processed meat 
 
IARC, 150 Cours Albert Thomas, 69372 Lyon CEDEX 08, France - Tel: +33 (0)4 72 73 84 85 - Fax: +33 (0)4 72 73 85 75 
© IARC 2015 - All Rights Reserved. 
 
Eating red meat has not yet been established as a cause of cancer. However, if the reported 
associations were proven to be causal, the Global Burden of Disease Project has estimated that 
diets high in red meat could be responsible for 50 000 cancer deaths per year worldwide. 
 
These numbers contrast with about 1 million cancer deaths per year globally due to tobacco 
smoking, 600 000 per year due to alcohol consumption, and more than 200 000 per year due to 
air pollution. 
 
Q. Could you quantify the risk of eating red meat and processed meat? 
 
A. The consumption of processed meat was associated with small increases in the risk of cancer 
in the studies reviewed. In those studies, the risk generally increased with the amount of meat 
consumed. An analysis of data from 10 studies estimated that every 50 gram portion of 
processed meat eaten daily increases the risk of colorectal cancer by about 18%. 
 
The cancer risk related to the consumption of red meat is more difficult to estimate because the 
evidence that red meat causes cancer is not as strong. However, if the association of red meat 
and colorectal cancer were proven to be causal, data from the same studies suggest that the 
risk of colorectal cancer could increase by 17% for every 100 gram portion of red meat eaten 
daily. 
 
Q. Is the risk higher in children, in elderly people, in women, or in men? Are some people 
more at risk? 
 
A. The available data did not allow conclusions about whether the risks differ in different groups 
of people. 
 
Q. What about people who have had colon cancer? Should they stop eating red meat? 
 
A. The available data did not allow conclusions about risks to people who have already had 
cancer. 
 
Q. Should I stop eating meat? 
 
A. Eating meat has known health benefits. Many national health recommendations advise 
people to limit intake of processed meat and red meat, which are linked to increased risks of 
death from heart disease, diabetes, and other illnesses. 
 
Q. How much meat is it safe to eat? 
 
A. The risk increases with the amount of meat consumed, but the data available for evaluation 
did not permit a conclusion about whether a safe level exists. 
 
Q. What makes red meat and processed meat increase the risk of cancer? 
 
A. Meat consists of multiple components, such as haem iron. Meat can also contain chemicals 
that form during meat processing or cooking. For instance, carcinogenic chemicals that form 
during meat processing include N-nitroso compounds and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 
Cooking of red meat or processed meat also produces heterocyclic aromatic amines as well as 
other chemicals including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which are also found in other foods 
and in air pollution. Some of these chemicals are known or suspected carcinogens, but despite

[page 4]
Page 4 
 
 
Q&A on the carcinogenicity of the consumption of red meat and processed meat 
 
IARC, 150 Cours Albert Thomas, 69372 Lyon CEDEX 08, France - Tel: +33 (0)4 72 73 84 85 - Fax: +33 (0)4 72 73 85 75 
© IARC 2015 - All Rights Reserved. 
 
this knowledge it is not yet fully understood how cancer risk is increased by red meat or 
processed meat. 
 
Q. Can you compare the risk of eating red meat with the risk of eating processed meat? 
 
A. Similar risks have been estimated for a typical portion, which is smaller on average for 
processed meat than for red meat. However, consumption of red meat has not been established 
as a cause of cancer. 
 
Q. What is WHO’s health recommendation to prevent cancer risk associated with eating 
red meat and processed meat? 
 
A. IARC is a research organization that evaluates the evidence available on the causes of 
cancer but does not make health recommendations as such. National governments and WHO 
are responsible for developing nutritional guidelines. This evaluation by IARC reinforces a 2002 
recommendation from WHO that people who eat meat should moderate the consumption of 
processed meat to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer. Some other dietary guidelines also 
recommend limiting consumption of red meat or processed meat, but these are focused mainly 
on reducing the intake of fat and sodium, which are risk factors for cardiovascular disease and 
obesity. Individuals who are concerned about cancer could consider reducing their consumption 
of red meat or processed meat until updated guidelines related specifically to cancer have been 
developed. 
 
Q. Should we eat only poultry and fish? 
 
A. The cancer risks associated with consumption of poultry and fish were not evaluated. 
 
Q. Should we be vegetarians? 
 
A. Vegetarian diets and diets that include meat have different advantages and disadvantages for 
health. However, this evaluation did not directly compare health risks in vegetarians and people 
who eat meat. That type of comparison is difficult because these groups can be different in other 
ways besides their consumption of meat. 
 
Q. Is there a type of red meat that is safer? 
 
A. A few studies have investigated the cancer risks associated with different types of red meat, 
such as beef and pork, and with different kinds of processed meats, like ham and hot dogs. 
However, there is not enough information to say whether higher or lower cancer risks are related 
to eating any particular type of red meat or processed meat. 
 
Q. Could the preservation method influence the risk (e.g. salting, deep-freezing, or 
irradiation)? 
 
A. Different preservation methods could result in the formation of carcinogens (e.g. N-nitroso 
compounds), but whether and how much this contributes to the cancer risk is unknown. 
 
Q. How many studies were evaluated? 
 
A. The IARC Working Group considered more than 800 different studies on cancer in humans 
(some studies provided data on both types of meat; in total more than 700 epidemiological

[page 5]
Page 5 
 
 
Q&A on the carcinogenicity of the consumption of red meat and processed meat 
 
IARC, 150 Cours Albert Thomas, 69372 Lyon CEDEX 08, France - Tel: +33 (0)4 72 73 84 85 - Fax: +33 (0)4 72 73 85 75 
© IARC 2015 - All Rights Reserved. 
 
studies provided data on red meat and more than 400 epidemiological studies provided data on 
processed meat). 
 
Q. How many experts were involved in the evaluation? 
 
A. The IARC Working Group consisted of 22 experts from 10 countries (List of Participants). 
 
Q. What actions do you think governments should take based on your results? 
 
A. IARC is a research organization that evaluates the evidence on the causes of cancer but 
does not make health recommendations as such. The IARC Monographs are, however, often 
used as a basis for making national and international policies, guidelines and recommendations 
to minimize cancer risks. Governments may decide to include this new information on the cancer 
hazards of processed meat in the context of other health risks and benefits in updating dietary 
recommendations.