

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Identification of severe
acute malnutrition in
infants under 6 months
of age
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In infants who are under 6 months of age, severe acute malnutrition is defined by a
very low weight-for-length or the presence of bilateral pitting oedema. Severe acute
malnutrition is increasingly being recognized in infants under 6 months of age and is
often associated with higher mortality in young infants than in older infants and
children.
While requiring nutritional intervention, not all severely malnourished infants require
hospitalization. However, given the difficulty in identifying and interpreting clinical signs

[page 2]
of infection, hydration status and other physiological outputs in infants, criteria for
admitting and discharging infants with severe acute malnutrition have not been
adequately defined. To address this, WHO has developed a set of recommendations for
the identification and management of severe acute malnutrition in infants who are
under 6 months of age.
weight-for-length <–3 Z-scores of the WHO Child Growth Standards median, or
presence of bilateral pitting oedema.
any serious clinical condition or medical complication for infants 6 months of age or
older with severe acute malnutrition as outlined in Recommendation 1.3 of the
updated guideline on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and
children (see WHO documents below)
recent weight loss or failure to gain weight
ineffective feeding (attachment, positioning and suckling) directly observed by
healthcare workers for 15–20 min, ideally in a supervised separated area
any pitting oedema
any medical or social issue needing more detailed assessment or intensive support
(e.g. disability, depression of the caregiver, or other adverse social circumstances)
WHO Recommendations
Severe acute malnutrition in infants who are 0–5 months of age is defined as:
Infants who are under 6 months of age with severe acute malnutrition with any of the
following complicating factors should be admitted for inpatient care:
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Management of the child with a serious infection or severe
malnutrition
Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Admission and discharge criteria for the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants
aged under 6 months
pdf, 1.20Mb Kerac M, Trehan I, Weisz A, Agapova S, Manary M. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.

[page 4]
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention

[page 5]
This intervention is a component of
managing children with SAM, which is
an Essential Nutrition Action targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO