

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Implementation of the
Baby-friendly Hospital
Initiative
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Breastfeeding has many health benefits for both the mother and infant. Breast milk
contains all the nutrients an infant needs in the first six months of life. Breastfeeding
protects against diarrhoea and common childhood illnesses such as pneumonia, and
may also have longer-term health benefits for the mother and child, such as reducing
the risk of overweight and obesity in childhood and adolescence.
To reduce infant mortality and ill health, WHO recommends that mothers begin
breastfeeding their infants within one hour of birth – referred to as “early initiation of
breastfeeding”. This ensures that the infant receives the colostrum (“first milk”), which is

[page 2]
rich in protective and regulatory factors. Infants should also be exclusively breastfed for
the first six months of life to achieve optimal growth, development and health, with
continued breastfeeding up to two years of age or beyond.
The Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative is a global effort to implement practices that
protect, promote and support breastfeeding. It aims to ensure that all maternity
facilities become centres of breastfeeding support.
Since its launch by WHO and UNICEF in 1991, more than 150 countries have
implemented the Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative. The Initiative has had a measurable
and proven impact, increasing both early initiation of breastfeeding and the likelihood
of infants being exclusively breastfed from birth until six months of age.
WHO Recommendations
One of the nine operational targets of the Global Strategy for Infant and Young Child
Feeding is to ensure that every maternity facility practices the Ten Steps to Successful
Breastfeeding. The Ten Steps have been updated in 2018 as described in Protecting,
promoting, and supporting breastfeeding in facilities providing maternity and newborn
services: the revised Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative 2018--Implementation guidance.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Implementation guidance: protecting, promoting, and supporting
breastfeeding in facilities providing maternity and newborn services:
the revised Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative 2018
Baby-friendly hospital initiative: revised, updated and expanded for
integrated care
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Interventions for promoting the initiation of breastfeeding
Balogun OO, O’Sullivan EJ, McFadden A, Ota E, Gavine A, Garner CD et al. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 11. Art. No.: CD001688.
Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy newborn infants
Moore ER, Bergman N, Anderson GC, Medley N.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 11.
Art. No.: CD003519.
Summary of this review 
Rooming-in for new mother and infant versus separate care for increasing the duration of
breastfeeding
Jaafar SH, Ho JJ, Lee KS.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.: CD006641.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Impact of the Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative on breastfeeding and child health outcomes: a
systematic review
Pérez-Escamilla R, Martinez JL, Segura-Pérez S. Matern Child Nutr. 2016;12(3):402-17.
Interventions to improve breastfeeding outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis

[page 4]
Sinha B, Chowdhury R, Sankar MJ, Martines J, Taneja S, Mazumder S, et al. Acta Paediatrica. 2015;
104:114–134.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Breastfeeding promotion and priority setting in health
Horton S, Sanghvi T, Phillips M, Fiedler J, Perez-Escamilla R, Lutter C, et al. Health Policy Plan. 1996;
11:156–68.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
This is an Essential Nutrition Action
targeting the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Implementation of the Baby-friendly
Hospital Initiative
Category 2 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale

[page 5]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO