

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Increasing potassium
intake to reduce blood
pressure and risk of
cardiovascular diseases
in adults
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the leading cause of death globally. An estimated
17.8 million people died from CVDs in 2017, representing approximately 32% of all
deaths worldwide. High blood pressure (hypertension) is a major risk for CVDs,
especially heart attack and stroke.
Evidence shows that increasing potassium intake significantly reduces blood pressure in
adults. Potassium is found in a variety of unrefined foods, including beans and peas,

[page 2]
nuts, vegetables such as spinach, cabbage and parsley and fruits such as bananas,
papayas and dates. Food processing reduces the amount of potassium in many food
products, and a diet high in processed foods and low in fresh fruits and vegetables is
often lacking in potassium.
WHO Recommendations
WHO recommends an increase in potassium intake from food to reduce blood pressure
and risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke and coronary heart disease in adults.
WHO suggests a potassium intake of at least 90 mmol/day (3510 mg/day) for adults.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: potassium intake for adults and children
Prevention of cardiovascular disease : guidelines for assessment and
management of total cardiovascular risk
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint
WHO/FAO expert consultation
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effect of increased potassium intake on cardiovascular risk factors and disease: systematic
review and meta-analyses
Aburto NJ, Hanson S, Gutierrez H, Hooper L, Elliott P, Cappuccio FP. BMJ. 2013; 346:f1378.
Effect of increased potassium intake on cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease and
stroke
Aburto NJ, Hanson S, Gutierrez H, Hooper L, Elliott P, Cappuccio FP. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2012.
Effect of increased potassium intake on blood pressure, renal function, blood lipids and other
potential adverse effects
Aburto NJ, Hanson S, Gutierrez H, Hooper L, Elliott P, Cappuccio FP et al. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2012.
Related Cochrane reviews
Potassium supplementation for the management of primary hypertension in adults
Dickinson HO, Nicolson D, Campbell F, Beyer FR, Mason J.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006,
Issue 3. Art. No.: CD004641.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses

[page 4]
Cost-effectiveness of milk powder fortified with potassium to decrease blood pressure and
prevent cardiovascular events among the adult population in China: a Markov model
Dainelli L, Xu T, Li M, Zimmermann D, Fang H, Wu Y, Detzel P.<br> BMJ Open. 2017; 7(9):e017136.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO