

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Increasing potassium
intake to control blood
pressure in children
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the leading cause of death globally. An estimated
17.8 million people died from CVDs in 2017, representing approximately 32% of all
deaths worldwide. High blood pressure (hypertension) is a major risk for CVDs. Children
with elevated blood pressure are at high risk of CVD pathology during childhood, and
are also at high risk for hypertension and CVDs as adults.
Evidence shows that increasing potassium intake significantly reduces blood pressure in
adults. In children, available studies show that increasing potassium intake reduces
blood pressure by a small, but non-significant amount. Potassium is found in a variety

[page 2]
of unrefined foods, including beans and peas, nuts, vegetables such as spinach,
cabbage and parsley and fruits such as bananas, papayas and dates. Food processing
reduces the amount of potassium in many food products, and a diet high in processed
foods and low in fresh fruits and vegetables is often lacking in potassium.
Given the small number of trials in children, guidelines were developed based on
systematic reviews for adults.
WHO Recommendations
WHO suggests an increase in potassium intake from food to control blood pressure in
children aged 2–15 years.
The recommended potassium intake of at least 90 mmol/day in adults should be
adjusted downward for children, based on the energy requirements of children relative
to those of adults.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: potassium intake for adults and children
Prevention of cardiovascular disease : guidelines for assessment and
management of total cardiovascular risk
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint
WHO/FAO expert consultation
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effect of increased potassium intake on blood pressure, renal function, blood lipids and other
potential adverse effects
Aburto NJ, Hanso S, Ziolkovska A, Gutierrez H. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
Effect of increased potassium intake on blood pressure and potential adverse effects in
children
Aburto NJ, Hanso S, Ziolkovska A, Gutierrez H. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
Effect of increased potassium intake on cardiovascular risk factors and disease: systematic
review and meta-analyses
Aburto NJ, Hanson S, Gutierrez H, Hooper L, Elliott P, Cappuccio FP. BMJ. 2013; 346:f1378.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention

[page 4]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO