

[page 1]
Donate
Infant and young child
feeding
20 December 2023 Reading time: 6 min (1519 words)
|
العربية中文
Français
Русский
Español
Every infant and child has the right to good nutrition according to the "Convention on the Rights
of  the Child".
Undernutrition is associated with 45% of  child deaths.
Globally in 2022, 149 million children under 5 were estimated to be stunted (too short for age), 45
million were estimated to be wasted (too thin for height), and 37 million were overweight or obese.
About 44% of  infants 0–6 months old are exclusively breastfed.
Few children receive nutritionally adequate and safe complementary foods; in many countries less
than a fourth of  infants 6–23 months of  age meet the criteria of  dietary diversity and feeding
frequency that are appropriate for their age.
Over 820 000 children's lives could be saved every year among children under 5 years, if  all
children 0–23 months were optimally breastfed. Breastfeeding improves IQ, school attendance,
and is associated with higher income in adult life. (1)
Improving child development and reducing health costs through breastfeeding results in economic
gains for individual families as well as at the national level.
Key facts
Undernutrition is estimated to be associated with 2.7 million child deaths annually or 45% of all child deaths.
Infant and young child feeding is a key area to improve child survival and promote healthy growth and
development. The first 2 years of a child’s life are particularly important, as optimal nutrition during this period
lowers morbidity and mortality, reduces the risk of chronic disease, and fosters better development overall.
2026/7/14 03:46
Infant and young child feeding
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/infant-and-young-child-feeding
1/6

[page 2]
Optimal breastfeeding is so critical that it could save the lives of over 820 000 children
under the age of 5 years each year.
WHO and UNICEF recommend:
early initiation of  breastfeeding within 1 hour of  birth;
exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months of  life; and
introduction of  nutritionally-adequate and safe complementary (solid) foods at 6 months together
with continued breastfeeding up to 2 years of  age or beyond.
However, many infants and children do not receive optimal feeding. For example, only
about 44% of infants aged 0–6 months worldwide were exclusively breastfed over the
period of 2015-2020.
Recommendations have been refined to also address the needs for infants born to HIV-
infected mothers. Antiretroviral drugs now allow these children to exclusively breastfeed
until they are 6 months old and continue breastfeeding until at least 12 months of age with
a significantly reduced risk of HIV transmission.
Breastfeeding
Exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months has many benefits for the infant and mother. Chief
among these is protection against gastrointestinal infections which is observed not only in
developing but also industrialized countries. Early initiation of breastfeeding, within 1 hour
of birth, protects the newborn from acquiring infections and reduces newborn mortality.
The risk of mortality due to diarrhoea and other infections can increase in infants who are
either partially breastfed or not breastfed at all.
Breast-milk is also an important source of energy and nutrients in children aged 6–23
months. It can provide half or more of a child’s energy needs between the ages of 6 and 12
months, and one third of energy needs between 12 and 24 months. Breast milk is also a
critical source of energy and nutrients during illness, and reduces mortality among children
who are malnourished.
Children and adolescents who were breastfed as babies are less likely to be overweight or
obese. Additionally, they perform better on intelligence tests and have higher school
attendance. Breastfeeding is associated with higher income in adult life. Improving child
development and reducing health costs results in economic gains for individual families as
well as at the national level.(1)
Longer durations of breastfeeding also contribute to the health and well-being of mothers:
it reduces the risk of ovarian and breast cancer and helps space pregnancies–exclusive
breastfeeding of babies under 6 months has a hormonal effect which often induces a lack
2026/7/14 03:46
Infant and young child feeding
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/infant-and-young-child-feeding
2/6

[page 3]
of menstruation. This is a natural (though not fail-safe) method of birth control known as
the Lactation Amenorrhoea Method.
Mothers and families need to be supported for their children to be optimally breastfed.
Actions that help protect, promote and support breastfeeding include:
adoption of  policies such as the International Labour Organization’s "Maternity Protection Convention
183" and "Recommendation No. 191", which complements "Convention No. 183" by suggesting a longer
duration of  leave and higher benefits;
adoption of  the "International Code of  Marketing of  Breast-milk Substitutes" and subsequent relevant World
Health Assembly resolutions;
implementation of  the "Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding" specified in the Baby-Friendly Hospital
Initiative, including:
skin-to-skin contact between mother and baby immediately after birth and initiation of
breastfeeding within the first hour of  life;
breastfeeding on demand (that is, as often as the child wants, day and night);
rooming-in (allowing mothers and infants to remain together 24 hours a day);
not giving babies additional food or drink, even water, unless medically necessary;
provision of  supportive health services with infant and young child feeding counselling during all
contacts with caregivers and young children, such as during antenatal and postnatal care, well-
child and sick child visits, and immunization; and
community support, including mother support groups and community-based health promotion
and education activities.
Breastfeeding practices are highly responsive to supportive interventions, and the
prevalence of exclusive and continued breastfeeding can be improved over the course of a
few years.
Complementary feeding
Around the age of 6 months, an infant’s need for energy and nutrients starts to exceed
what is provided by breast milk, and complementary foods are necessary to meet those
needs. An infant of this age is also developmentally ready for other foods. If
complementary foods are not introduced around the age of 6 months, or if they are given
inappropriately, an infant’s growth may falter. Guiding principles for appropriate
complementary feeding are:
continue frequent, on-demand breastfeeding until 2 years of  age or beyond;
practise responsive feeding (for example, feed infants directly and assist older children. Feed
slowly and patiently, encourage them to eat but do not force them, talk to the child and maintain
eye contact);
practise good hygiene and proper food handling;
start at 6 months with small amounts of  food and increase gradually as the child gets older;
gradually increase food consistency and variety;
2026/7/14 03:46
Infant and young child feeding
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/infant-and-young-child-feeding
3/6

[page 4]
increase the number of  times that the child is fed: 2–3 meals per day for infants 6–8 months of  age
and 3–4 meals per day for infants 9–23 months of  age, with 1–2 additional snacks as required;
use fortified complementary foods or vitamin-mineral supplements as needed; and
during illness, increase fluid intake including more breastfeeding, and offer soft, favourite foods.
Feeding in exceptionally difficult
circumstances
Families and children in difficult circumstances require special attention and practical
support. Wherever possible, mothers and babies should remain together and get the
support they need to exercise the most appropriate feeding option available. Breastfeeding
remains the preferred mode of infant feeding in almost all difficult situations, for instance:
low-birth-weight or premature infants;
mothers living with HIV in settings where mortality due to diarrhoea, pneumonia and malnutrition
remain prevalent;
adolescent mothers;
infants and young children who are malnourished; and
families suffering the consequences of  complex emergencies.
HIV and infant feeding
Breastfeeding, and especially early and exclusive breastfeeding, is one of the most
significant ways to improve infant survival rates. While HIV can pass from a mother to her
child during pregnancy, labour or delivery, and also through breast-milk, the evidence on
HIV and infant feeding shows that giving antiretroviral treatment (ART) to mothers living
with HIV significantly reduces the risk of transmission through breastfeeding and also
improves her health.
WHO now recommends that all people living with HIV, including pregnant women and
lactating mothers living with HIV, take ART for life from when they first learn their infection
status.
Mothers living in settings where morbidity and mortality due to diarrhoea, pneumonia and
malnutrition are prevalent and national health authorities endorse breastfeeding should
exclusively breastfeed their babies for 6 months, then introduce appropriate
complementary foods and continue breastfeeding up to at least the child’s first birthday.
Questions and answers on HIV and infant feeding
2026/7/14 03:46
Infant and young child feeding
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/infant-and-young-child-feeding
4/6

[page 5]
WHO response
WHO is committed to supporting countries with implementation and monitoring of the
"Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutrition", endorsed
by Member States in May 2012. The plan includes 6 targets, one of which is to increase, by
2025, the rate of exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months up to at least 50%. Activities
that will help to achieve this include those outlined in the "Global strategy for infant and
young child feeding", which aims to protect, promote and support appropriate infant and
young child feeding.
UNICEF and WHO created the Global Breastfeeding Collective to rally political, legal,
financial, and public support for breastfeeding. The Collective brings together
implementers and donors from governments, philanthropies, international organizations,
and civil society. The Collective’s vision is a world in which all mothers have the technical,
financial, emotional, and public support they need to breastfeed.
WHO has formed the Network for Global Monitoring and Support for Implementation of
the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and Subsequent Relevant
World Health Assembly Resolutions, also known as NetCode. The goal of NetCode is to
protect and promote breastfeeding by ensuring that breastmilk substitutes are not
marketed inappropriately. Specifically, NetCode is building the capacity of Member States
and civil society to strengthen national Code legislation, continuously monitor adherence to
the Code, and take action to stop all violations.
In addition, WHO and UNICEF have developed courses for training health workers to
provide skilled support to breastfeeding mothers, help them overcome problems, and
monitor the growth of children, so they can identify early the risk of undernutrition or
overweight/obesity.
WHO provides simple, coherent and feasible guidance to countries for promoting and
supporting improved infant feeding by HIV-infected mothers to prevent mother-to-child
transmission, good nutrition of the baby, and protect the health of the mother.
(1) Reference:
The Lancet Breastfeeding Series papers
data-sf-ec-immutable="">
Breastfeeding in the 21st century: epidemiology, mechanisms, and lifelong effect.
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(15)01024-7/abstract
Victora, Cesar G et al. The Lancet , Volume 387 , Issue 10017 , 475 – 490.
2026/7/14 03:46
Infant and young child feeding
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/infant-and-young-child-feeding
5/6

[page 6]
Why invest, and what it will take to improve breastfeeding practices?
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(15)01044-2/abstract
Rollins, Nigel C et al. The Lancet , Volume 387 , Issue 10017 , 491 – 504
Global nutrition targets 2025 - breastfeeding
Ten steps to successful breastfeeding
Infographics
2026/7/14 03:46
Infant and young child feeding
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/infant-and-young-child-feeding
6/6