

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Infant feeding in areas
of Zika virus
transmission
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Zika virus is a mosquito-borne virus transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes and is known to
circulate in Africa, the Americas, Asia and the Pacific. Infection with Zika virus usually
results in mild illness and symptoms may include fever, skin rashes, conjunctivitis,
muscle and joint pain, malaise, and headache.
Although Zika virus disease is generally mild, increased cases of congenital
microcephaly and Guillain-Barré syndrome have been observed in recent outbreaks in
the Americas and the Pacific and a growing body of evidence points towards a causative
role for Zika virus in these neurological disorders.

[page 2]
Current widespread transmission of the virus and detection of the virus in breast milk
from two mothers with confirmed Zika virus infection has also raised questions as to
whether transmission can occur during breastfeeding, a practice essential to infant and
young child survival and development. However, there are currently no documented
reports of Zika virus being transmitted to infants through breastfeeding and in
countries with ongoing transmission of Zika virus, no adverse neurological outcomes
have been reported to date in infants with postnatally acquired Zika virus disease.
Based on the available evidence, which suggests that the benefits of breastfeeding for
the infant and mother outweigh any potential risk of Zika virus transmission through
breast milk, WHO has issued interim guidance on breastfeeding in the context of Zika
virus.
WHO Recommendations
Infants born to mothers with suspected, probable or confirmed Zika virus infection, or
who reside in or have travelled to areas of ongoing Zika virus transmission, should be
fed according to normal infant feeding guidelines. They should start breastfeeding
within one hour of birth, be exclusively breastfed for six months and have timely
introduction of adequate, safe and properly fed complementary foods, while continuing
breastfeeding up to two years of age or beyond.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: infant feeding in areas of Zika virus transmission
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines

[page 3]
Transmission of Zika virus through breast milk and other breastfeeding-related bodily-fluids: A
systematic review
Colt S, Garcia-Casal MN, Peña-Rosas JP, Finkelstein JL, Rayco-Solon P, Weise Prinzo ZC, Mehta S. PLoS Negl
Trop Dis. 2017;11(4):e0005528.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 4]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO