

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Infant feeding for the
prevention of mother-
to-child transmission of
HIV
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Mother-to-child transmission of HIV is the primary mode of HIV infection in infants.
Transmission can occur during pregnancy, birth, or through breastfeeding. Decisions on
whether or not HIV-infected mothers should breastfeed their infants is generally based
on comparing the risk of infants acquiring HIV through breastfeeding, with the
increased risk of death from malnutrition, diarrhoea and pneumonia if the infants are
not exclusively breastfed.

[page 2]
Accumulating evidence has shown that giving antiretroviral medicines to the mother or
the infant can significantly reduce the risk of HIV transmission through breastfeeding.
National health authorities can refer to this evidence when formulating a strategy on
infant feeding.
WHO Recommendations
Mothers known to be HIV-infected should be provided with lifelong antiretroviral
therapy or antiretroviral prophylaxis interventions to reduce HIV transmission through
breastfeeding.
National or sub-national health authorities should decide whether health services will
principally counsel mothers known to be HIV-infected to either breastfeed and take
antiretrovirals, or, avoid all breastfeeding.
In settings where national health authorities are recommending breastfeeding for
HIV-infected mothers:
Mothers known to be HIV-infected (and whose infants are HIV uninfected or of
unknown HIV status) should exclusively breastfeed their infants for the first 6 months of
life, introducing appropriate complementary foods thereafter, and continue breast
feeding.
Mothers living with HIV should breastfeed for at least 12 months and may continue
breastfeeding for up to 24 months or longer (similar to the general population) while
being fully supported for ART adherence (see the WHO Consolidated guidelines on the
use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection for interventions to
optimize adherence).
In settings where health services provide and support lifelong ART, including adherence
counselling, and promote and support breastfeeding among women living with HIV, the
duration of breastfeeding should not be restricted.
Breastfeeding should then only stop once a nutritionally adequate and safe diet without
breast milk can be provided.
National and local health authorities should actively coordinate and implement services
in health facilities and activities in workplaces, communities and homes to protect,
promote and support breastfeeding among women living with HIV.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents

[page 3]
Guideline: updates on HIV and infant feeding
Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating
and preventing HIV infection (2013)
WHO guidelines on HIV and infant feeding 2010: an updated framework
for priority action
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Postnatal HIV Transmission rates at age six and 12 months in infants of HIV-infected women
on ART initiating breastfeeding: a systematic review of the literaturepdf, 908kb
pdf, 908kb Chikhungu L, Bispo S, Newell ML. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016.
HIV-free survival at 12 – 24 months in breastfed infants of HIV-infected women on ART: a
systematic reviewpdf, 949kb
pdf, 949kb Chikhungu L, Bispo S, Newell ML. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016.

[page 4]
A systematic review of HIV-free survival by feeding practices from birth to 18 months: Annex
2pdf, 227kb
pdf, 227kb Chetty T, Naidu KK, Newell ML. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
Individual evidence summaries of all studies included in the systematic review of HIV-free
survival by infant feeding practices from birth to 18 – 24 months: Annex 5pdf, 803kb
pdf, 803kb Chetty T, Naidu KK, Newell ML. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009.
An analysis of optimal breastfeeding durations for HIV-Exposed Infants: Assessing the impact
of naternal ART use, infant mortality, and replacement feeding riskpdf, 1.02Mb
pdf, 1.02Mb Mallampati D, MacLean R, Ciaranello A. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016.
Related Cochrane reviews
Interventions for preventing late postnatal mother-to-child transmission of HIV
Horvath T, Madi BC, Iuppa IM, Kennedy GE, Rutherford GW, Read JS. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2009; Issue 1. Art. No.: CD006734.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Cost-effectiveness analysis of infant feeding strategies to prevent mother-to-child
transmission of HIV in South Africa
Maredza M, Bertram MY, Saloojee H, Chersich MF, Tollman SM, Hofman KJ. Afr J AIDS Res. 2013; 12(3):151-
60.
The cost-effectiveness of different feeding patterns combined with prompt treatments for
preventing mother-to-child HIV transmission in South Africa: estimates from simulation
modeling
Yu W, Li C, Fu X, Cui Z, Liu X, Fan L et al. PLoS One. 2014; 9(7):e102872.
Scaling-up exclusive breastfeeding support programmes: the example of KwaZulu-Natal
Desmond C, Bland RM, Boyce G, Coovadia HM, Coutsoudis A, Rollins N, Newell ML. PLoS One. 2008;
3(6):e2454.

[page 5]
Prevention of Mother-To-Child Transmission of HIV: Cost-Effectiveness of Antiretroviral
Regimens and Feeding Options in Rwanda
Binagwaho A, Pegurri E, Drobac PC, Mugwaneza P, Stulac SN, Wagner CM et al. PLoS One. 2013;
8(2):e54180.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 6]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO