

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Insecticide-treated
nets to reduce the risk
of malaria in pregnant
women
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Pregnancy reduces a woman’s immunity, making pregnant women more susceptible to
malaria infection and increasing the risk of illness, anaemia, severe disease and death.
For the unborn child, maternal malaria increases the risk of spontaneous abortion,
stillbirth, premature delivery and low birth weight – a leading cause of child mortality.
Evidence shows that in malaria-endemic areas, sleeping under mosquito nets treated
with an insecticide is beneficial to the health of the pregnant woman, her fetus and the
newborn infant. Long-lasting insecticidal nets are designed to maintain their

[page 2]
effectiveness against mosquitoes that carry malaria and other diseases for at least
three years. Studies have shown that long-lasting insecticidal nets may be less
expensive to use than conventionally treated nets.
Insecticide-treated nets are safe for use as a personal protection method during
pregnancy. Women should start using them as early in pregnancy as possible, and
continue to use them throughout pregnancy and in the postpartum period for both
mother and child.
WHO Recommendations
Universal access to and use of long-lasting insecticidal nets remains the goal for all
people at risk of malaria.
In endemic areas with intense malaria transmission (stable malaria), all infants at their
first immunization and all pregnant women as early as possible in pregnancy should
receive one long-lasting insecticidal net through immunization and antenatal care visits.
WHO recommendations on deployment of mosquito nets treated with a pyrethroid and
piperonyl butoxide can be found in Conditions for deployment of mosquito nets treated
with a pyrethroid and piperonyl butoxide under ‘WHO documents’ below.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Achieving and maintaining universal coverage with long-lasting
insecticidal nets for malaria control
Conditions for deployment of mosquito nets treated with a pyrethroid
and piperonyl butoxide: recommendations
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Insecticide-treated nets for preventing malaria in pregnancy
Gamble CL, Ekwaru PJ, ter Kuile FO. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2006; Issue 2. Art. No.:
CD003755.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Malaria prevention in pregnancy, birthweight, and neonatal mortality: a meta-analysis of 32
national cross-sectional datasets in Africa
Eisele TP, Larsen DA, Anglewicz PA, Keating J, Yukich J, Bennett A, et al. Lancet Infect Dis. 2012;12(12):942-9.
Insecticide-treated nets for the prevention of malaria in pregnancy: a systematic review of
randomized control trials
Gamble CL, Ekwaru PJ, Garner P, ter Kuile FO. PLoS Med. 2007, 4(3) e107.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Cost-effectiveness analysis of three health interventions to prevent malaria in pregnancy in an
area of low transmission in Uganda
Hansen KS, Ndyomugyenyi R, Magnussen P, Clarke SE. Int Health. 2012; 4(1):38-46.
Cost-effectiveness of adding bed net distribution for malaria prevention to antenatal services
in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo
Becker-Dreps SI, Biddle AK, Pettifor A, Musuamba G, Imbie DN, Meshnick S, Behets F. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
2009; 81(3):496-502.

[page 4]
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Insecticide-treated nets to reduce
the risk of malaria in pregnant
women
Category 2 intervention
Commentary
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO