

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Intermittent iron
supplementation in
preschool and school-
age children in malaria-
endemic areas
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Approximately 300 million children globally had anaemia in 2011. The most common
cause of anaemia is thought to be deficiency in iron, an essential nutrient for
development and cell growth in the immune and neural systems, as well as in
regulation of energy metabolism and exercise. Iron deficiency can result from
inadequate intake or absorption of dietary iron, increased need during periods of
growth, and blood loss from helminth* infection.

[page 2]
Children are particularly vulnerable to iron deficiency anaemia because of their
increased iron requirements in the periods of rapid growth, especially in the first five
years of life. Iron deficiency anaemia in children has been linked to increased childhood
morbidity and impaired cognitive development and school performance.
Malaria is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in children in sub-Saharan Africa
and is an important contributor to anaemia in other endemic regions, through direct
rupture of infected red blood cells, the body’s immune destruction of both parasitized
and uninfected red blood cells, and temporary dysfunction of the bone marrow.
Results of some studies in young children have suggested that iron supplementation
may increase the risk of malaria and death in children living in malaria-endemic regions.
However, recent evidence suggests that iron supplementation does not adversely affect
children when regular malaria surveillance and treatment services are provided.
Supplementation with iron once, twice or three times per week on non-consecutive
days has been proposed as an effective and safe way to increase children's iron intake.
These intermittent regimens may lead to fewer side effects than the daily regimen and
increase adherence to supplementation.
* Helminths are a group of parasites commonly referred to as worms and include
schistosomes and soil-transmitted helminths
WHO Recommendations
In settings where the prevalence of anaemia in preschool (24–59 months) or school-age
(5–12 years) children is 20% or higher, WHO recommends the intermittent use of iron
supplements as a public health intervention to improve iron status and reduce the risk
of anaemia among children.
In malaria-endemic areas, the provision of iron supplements should be implemented in
conjunction with measures to prevent, diagnose and treat malaria.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: intermittent iron supplementation in preschool and school-
age children
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Intermittent iron supplementation for improving nutrition and development in children under
12 years of age
De-Regil LM, Jefferds MED, Sylvetsky AC, Dowswell T. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011; Issue
12. Art. No.: CD009085.
Summary of this review 
Related Cochrane reviews
Oral iron supplements for children in malaria-endemic areas
Neuberger A, Okebe J, Yahav D, Paul M. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 2. Art. No.:
CD006589.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Effect of iron supplementation on incidence of infectious illness in children: systematic review
Gera T, Sachdev HPS BMJ. 2002, 325:1142.
Effect of iron supplementation on haemoglobin response in children: systematic review of
randomised controlled trials
Gera T, Sachdev HPS, Nestel P, Sachdev SS. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition. 2007;
44(4):468–486.
Effects of iron supplementation in nonanemic pregnant women, infants, and young children
on the mental performance and psychomotor development of children: a systematic review of
randomized controlled trials
Szajewska H, Ruszczynski M, Chmielewska A. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2010; 91(6):1684–
1690.

[page 4]
Effect of iron supplementation on physical growth in children: systematic review of
randomised controlled trials
Sachdev HPS, Gera T, Nestel P. Public Health Nutrition. 2006; 9:904–920.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 5]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO