

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Intermittent iron and
folic acid
supplementation
during pregnancy
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
It is estimated that more than 40% of pregnant women worldwide are anaemic. At least
half of this anaemia burden is assumed to be due to iron deficiency.
Pregnant women require additional iron and folic acid to meet their own nutritional
needs as well as those of the developing fetus. Deficiencies in iron and folic acid during
pregnancy can potentially negatively impact the health of the mother, her pregnancy, as
well as fetal development.

[page 2]
The use of daily iron and folic acid supplements throughout pregnancy has been the
standard approach to prevent and treat iron deficiency anaemia. Despite its proven
efficacy, the use of daily iron supplementation has been limited in programme settings,
possibly due to a lack of compliance, concerns about the safety of the intervention
among women with an adequate iron intake, and variable availability of the
supplements at community level. Experience has shown that intermittent regimens may
be more accepted by women, with increased adherence to supplementation
programmes.
WHO Recommendations
Intermittent oral iron and folic acid supplementation with 120 mg of elemental iron*
and 2800 µg (2.8 mg) folic acid once weekly is recommended for pregnant women to
improve maternal and neonatal outcomes if daily iron is not acceptable due to side-
effects, and in populations with an anaemia prevalence among pregnant women of less
than 20%.**
* The equivalent of 120 mg of elemental iron is 600 mg ferrous sulfate heptahydrate,
360 mg ferrous fumarate or 1000 mg ferrous gluconate.
**This recommendation supercedes the previous recommendation on WHO
guideline ‘Intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation in non-anaemic pregnant
women’ (2012).
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy
experience
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines

[page 3]
Intermittent oral iron supplementation during pregnancy
Peña-Rosas JP, De-Regil LM, Gomez Malave H, Flores-Urrutia MC, Dowswell T. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD009997.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Effect of routine iron supplementation with or without folic acid on anemia during pregnancy
Yakoob MY, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2011; 11(suppl3):S21.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Weekly iron-folic acid supplementation with regular deworming is cost-effective in preventing
anaemia in women of reproductive age in Vietnam
Casey GJ, Sartori D, Horton SE, Phuc TQ, Phu LB, Thach DT, et al. PLoS One. 2011; 6(9):e23723.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is an Essential
Nutrition Action targeting the first 1000
days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions

[page 4]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO