

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Intermittent iron
supplementation in
preschool and school-
age children
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Approximately 300 million children globally had anaemia in 2011. The most common
cause of anaemia is thought to be deficiency in iron, an essential nutrient for
development and cell growth in the immune and neural systems, as well as in
regulation of energy metabolism and exercise. Iron deficiency can result from
inadequate intake or absorption of dietary iron, increased need during periods of
growth, and blood loss from helminth* infection.

[page 2]
Children are particularly vulnerable to iron deficiency anaemia because of their
increased iron requirements in the periods of rapid growth, especially in the first five
years of life. Iron deficiency anaemia in children has been linked to increased childhood
morbidity and impaired cognitive development and school performance.
Supplementation with iron once, twice or three times per week on non-consecutive
days has been proposed as an effective and safe way to increase children's iron intake.
These intermittent regimens may lead to fewer side effects than the daily regimen and
increase adherence to supplementation.
* Helminths are a group of parasites commonly referred to as worms and include
schistosomes and soil-transmitted helminths
WHO Recommendations
In settings where the prevalence of anaemia in preschool (24–59 months) or school-age
(5–12 years) children is 20% or higher, intermittent iron supplementation is
recommended as a public health intervention in preschool and school-age children to
improve iron status and reduce the risk of anaemia.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: intermittent iron supplementation in preschool and school-
age children
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Intermittent iron supplementation for improving nutrition and development in children under
12 years of age

[page 3]
De-Regil LM, Jefferds MED, Sylvetsky AC, Dowswell T. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011; Issue
12. Art. No.: CD009085.
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews
Effects of iron supplementation in nonanemic pregnant women, infants, and young children
on the mental performance and psychomotor development of children: a systematic review of
randomized controlled trials
Szajewska H, Ruszczynski M, Chmielewska A. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2010; 91(6):1684–
1690.
Effect of iron supplementation on physical growth in children: systematic review of
randomised controlled trials
Sachdev HPS, Gera T, Nestel P. Public Health Nutrition. 2006; 9:904–920.
Effect of iron supplementation on haemoglobin response in children: systematic review of
randomised controlled trials
Gera T, Sachdev HPS, Nestel P, Sachdev SS. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition. 2007;
44(4):468–486.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO