

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Intermittent iron and
folic acid
supplementation in
adult women and
adolescent girls in
malaria-endemic areas
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
It is estimated that more than 30% of women of reproductive age worldwide are
anaemic. At least half of this anaemia burden is assumed to be due to iron deficiency.
Because women of reproductive age lose iron through menstruation and their diets are
often lacking in available iron, they are particularly vulnerable to iron deficiency.

[page 2]
Daily supplementation with iron and folic acid for a period of 3 months has been the
standard approach for the prevention and treatment of iron deficiency anaemia among
women of reproductive age. Despite its proven efficacy, there has been limited success
with the daily regimen public health programmes, which is thought to be primarily due
to low coverage rates, insufficient tablet distribution and low adherence.
Recent evidence suggests that iron and folic acid supplements consumed once, twice or
three times a week on non-consecutive days by all women of reproductive age are an
effective, safe and more acceptable alternative to daily iron supplements, including in
settings where malaria is endemic.
WHO Recommendations
In populations where the prevalence of anaemia among nonpregnant women of
reproductive age is 20% or higher, intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation is
recommended as a public health intervention in menstruating women, to improve their
haemoglobin concentrations and iron status and reduce the risk of anaemia.
In malaria-endemic areas, the provision of iron and folic acid supplements should be
implemented in conjunction with adequate measures to prevent, diagnose and treat
malaria.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation in
menstruating women
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines

[page 3]
Intermittent iron supplementation for reducing anaemia and its associated impairments in
menstruating women
Fernández-Gaxiola AC, De-Regil LM.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 12. Art. No.:
CD009218.
Summary of this review 
Related Cochrane reviews
Intermittent iron supplementation for reducing anaemia and its associated impairments in
adolescent and adult menstruating women
Fernández‐Gaxiola AC, De‐Regil LM. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019; Issue 1. Art. No.:
CD009218.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is an Essential
Nutrition Action targeting the first 1000
days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions


[page 4]
Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO