

[page 1]
Intravenous Vitamin C (PDQ®)–Patient Version
Go to Health Professional Version
Overview
Vitamin C is a nutrient found in food and dietary supplements. It is an antioxidant and
also plays a key role in making collagen (see Question 1).
Vitamin C may be taken by mouth or given by an intravenous (IV) infusion. When taken
by IV infusion, vitamin C can reach higher levels in the blood than when the same
amount is taken by mouth (see Question 2).
Some studies of IV vitamin C use in people with cancer showed it improved quality of life
and reduced cancer-related side effects (see Question 4).
In general, vitamin C given by IV infusion has caused very few side effects in clinical
trials. However, IV vitamin C may cause serious side effects in people with kidney
disease, G6PD deficiency, or hemochromatosis (see Question 5).
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not approved the use of IV vitamin C
as a treatment for cancer (see Question 7).
Questions and Answers About Intravenous Vitamin C
1. What is vitamin C?
Vitamin C is a nutrient that is found in food, such as oranges, grapefruit, kiwi, peppers,
and broccoli, and in dietary supplements. Vitamin C is an antioxidant and helps
prevent damage to cells caused by free radicals. It also works with enzymes to play a
key role in making collagen. Vitamin C is also called L-ascorbic acid or ascorbate.
2. How is vitamin C given or taken?
Vitamin C may be given by intravenous (IV) infusion or taken by mouth. When given by
IV infusion, vitamin C can reach much higher levels in the blood than when it is taken
by mouth.
3. Have any laboratory or animal studies been done using IV vitamin C?
•
•
•
•
•

[page 2]
In laboratory studies, tumor cells are used to test a substance to find out if it is likely to
have any anticancer effects. In animal studies, tests are done to see if a drug,
procedure, or treatment is safe and effective. Laboratory and animal studies are done
in animals before a substance is tested in people.
Laboratory and animal studies have tested the effects of IV vitamin C. Laboratory
studies suggest that high levels of vitamin C may kill cancer cells. For information on
laboratory and animal studies done using intravenous vitamin C, see the
Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of
Intravenous Vitamin C.
4. Have any studies of IV vitamin C been done in people with cancer?
Several studies of IV vitamin C given alone or in combination with other drugs in
people with cancer include the following:
Studies of IV vitamin C alone
One study found that people with cancer who received IV vitamin C had better
quality of life and fewer cancer-related side effects than those who did not
receive it.
In a single-arm pilot study of people with castration-resistant prostate cancer, IV
vitamin C did not lower prostate-specific antigen levels or stop tumors from
growing.
In a study of healthy volunteers and people with cancer, vitamin C was shown to
be safe at doses up to 1.5 g/kg in people who do not have kidney stones, other
kidney diseases, or G6PD deficiency. Studies have also shown that vitamin C
levels in the blood are higher when given by IV than when taken by mouth, and
last for more than 4 hours.
Studies of IV vitamin C combined with other drugs
Studies of IV vitamin C given with other drugs have shown mixed results.
In a small study of 14 people with advanced pancreatic cancer, IV vitamin C was
given along with chemotherapy and targeted therapy (erlotinib). Five study
participants did not complete the vitamin C treatment because the tumor
continued to grow during treatment. The nine participants who completed the
treatment had stable disease as shown by imaging studies. Very few side effects
were reported from the vitamin C treatment.
In a study of people newly diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, IV vitamin C did
not interfere with gemcitabine.
•
•
•
•
•

[page 3]
In another small study, 9 people with advanced pancreatic cancer were given
chemotherapy once a week for 3 weeks along with IV vitamin C twice a week for
4 weeks during each treatment cycle. The cancer did not progress over an
average of 6 months in these patients. No serious side effects were reported
with the combined treatment.
In a study of 27 people with advanced ovarian cancer, chemotherapy alone was
compared with chemotherapy and IV vitamin C. IV vitamin C was given during
chemotherapy and for 6 months after chemotherapy ended. Those who
received IV vitamin C had fewer side effects from the chemotherapy.
People with refractory metastatic colorectal cancer or metastatic melanoma
were treated with IV vitamin C given along with arsenic trioxide and other drugs.
The treatment had no anticancer effect, the tumor continued to grow during
treatment, and patients had serious side effects. These studies did not have a
comparison group, so it is unclear how much the IV vitamin C affected the side
effects.
In two pilot trials, people with non-small cell lung cancer or glioblastoma
multiforme were given standard therapy plus IV vitamin C. Those who received
standard therapy plus IV vitamin C had better overall survival and fewer side
effects than the control groups.
More studies of combining IV vitamin C with other drugs are being done. These include
a number of clinical trials combining IV vitamin C with arsenic trioxide, showing mixed
results.
5. Have any side effects or risks been reported from IV vitamin C?
IV vitamin C has caused very few side effects in clinical trials. However, IV vitamin C
may be harmful in people with certain risk factors.
In people with a history of kidney disease, kidney failure has been reported
after treatment with IV vitamin C. People who are likely to develop kidney
stones should not be treated with IV vitamin C.
One study reported too much fluid in the body (fluid overload) related to IV
vitamin C. This may have been caused by the IV delivery method and not the
vitamin C.
Case reports have shown that people with an inherited disorder called G6PD
deficiency should not be given high doses of vitamin C because it may cause
hemolysis.
Because vitamin C may make iron more easily absorbed and used by the body,
high doses of vitamin C are not recommended for people with
hemochromatosis (a condition in which the body takes up and stores more iron
than it needs).
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

[page 4]
6. Have any drug interactions been reported from adding IV vitamin C to treatment
with anticancer drugs?
A drug interaction is a change in the way a drug acts in the body when taken with
certain other drugs. When IV vitamin C is combined with certain anticancer drugs, the
anticancer drugs may not work as well. So far, these effects have been seen only in
some laboratory and animal studies. For information on drug interactions while using
IV vitamin C, see the Adverse Effects section of the health professional version of
Intravenous Vitamin C.
7. Is IV vitamin C approved by the FDA for use as a cancer treatment in the United
States?
The FDA has not approved the use of IV vitamin C as a treatment for cancer.
The FDA regulates dietary supplements separately from foods, cosmetics, and drugs.
The FDA's Good Manufacturing Practices require that every finished batch of
supplements is safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the
consumer. However, the FDA does not regularly review the way that supplements are
made, so all batches and brands of IV vitamin C may not be the same.
About This PDQ Summary
About PDQ
Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer
information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published
information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and
complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The
health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The
patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions
have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also
available in Spanish.
PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is
the federal government’s center of biomedical research. The PDQ summaries are based on
an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI
or the NIH.
Purpose of This Summary
This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the use of
intravenous vitamin C in the treatment of people with cancer. It is meant to inform and help

[page 5]
patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for
making decisions about health care.
Reviewers and Updates
Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date.
These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to
cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new
information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change.
The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version,
which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Integrative, Alternative, and
Complementary Therapies Editorial Board.
Clinical Trial Information
A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is
better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the
laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better
ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about
the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new
treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become
"standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials
are open only to patients who have not started treatment.
Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer
Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237).
Permission to Use This Summary
PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It
cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary
is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence
such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the
risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].”
The best way to cite this PDQ summary is:
PDQ® Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board. PDQ
Intravenous Vitamin C. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated <MM/DD/YYYY>.
Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/cam/patient/vitamin-c-pdq.
Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389507]
Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher
for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and
you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot

[page 6]
be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this
summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online.
Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images.
Disclaimer
The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance
reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the
Managing Cancer Care page.
Contact Us
More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be
found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov
through the website’s E-mail Us.
General CAM Information
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)—also called integrative medicine—includes
a broad range of healing philosophies, approaches, and therapies. A therapy is generally
called complementary when it is used in addition to conventional treatments; it is often
called alternative when it is used instead of conventional treatment. (Conventional
treatments are those that are widely accepted and practiced by the mainstream medical
community.) Depending on how they are used, some therapies can be considered either
complementary or alternative. Complementary and alternative therapies are used in an
effort to prevent illness, reduce stress, prevent or reduce side effects and symptoms, or
control or cure disease.
Unlike conventional treatments for cancer, complementary and alternative therapies are
often not covered by insurance companies. Patients should check with their insurance
provider to find out about coverage for complementary and alternative therapies.
Cancer patients considering complementary and alternative therapies should discuss this
decision with their doctor, nurse, or pharmacist as they would any type of treatment. Some
complementary and alternative therapies may affect their standard treatment or may be
harmful when used with conventional treatment.
Evaluation of CAM Therapies
It is important that the same scientific methods used to test conventional therapies are
used to test CAM therapies. The National Cancer Institute and the National Center for

[page 7]
Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) are sponsoring a number of clinical trials
(research studies) at medical centers to test CAM therapies for use in cancer.
Conventional approaches to cancer treatment have generally been studied for safety and
effectiveness through a scientific process that includes clinical trials with large numbers of
patients. Less is known about the safety and effectiveness of complementary and
alternative methods. Few CAM therapies have been tested using demanding scientific
methods. A small number of CAM therapies that were thought to be purely alternative
approaches are now being used in cancer treatment—not as cures, but as complementary
therapies that may help patients feel better and recover faster. One example is
acupuncture. According to a panel of experts at a National Institutes of Health (NIH) meeting
in November 1997, acupuncture has been found to help control nausea and vomiting
caused by chemotherapy and pain related to surgery. However, some approaches, such as
the use of laetrile, have been studied and found not to work and to possibly cause harm.
The NCI Best Case Series Program which was started in 1991, is one way CAM approaches
that are being used in practice are being studied. The program is overseen by the NCI’s
Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine (OCCAM). Health care
professionals who offer alternative cancer therapies submit their patients’ medical records
and related materials to OCCAM. OCCAM carefully reviews these materials to see if any
seem worth further research.
Questions to Ask Your Health Care Provider About CAM
When considering complementary and alternative therapies, patients should ask their
health care provider the following questions:
What side effects can be expected?
What are the risks related to this therapy?
What benefits can be expected from this therapy?
Do the known benefits outweigh the risks?
Will the therapy affect conventional treatment?
Is this therapy part of a clinical trial?
If so, who is the sponsor of the trial?
Will the therapy be covered by health insurance?
To Learn More About CAM
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

[page 8]
National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH)
The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) at the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) facilitates research and evaluation of complementary and
alternative practices, and provides information about a variety of approaches to health
professionals and the public.
NCCIH Clearinghouse
Post Office Box 7923 Gaithersburg, MD 20898–7923
Telephone: 1-888-644-6226 (toll free)
TTY (for deaf and hard of hearing callers): 1-866-464-3615
E-mail: info@nccih.nih.gov
Website: https://nccih.nih.gov
CAM on PubMed
NCCIH and the NIH National Library of Medicine (NLM) jointly developed CAM on PubMed, a
free and easy-to-use search tool for finding CAM-related journal citations. As a subset of the
NLM's PubMed bibliographic database, CAM on PubMed features more than 230,000
references and abstracts for CAM-related articles from scientific journals. This database also
provides links to the websites of over 1,800 journals, allowing users to view full-text articles.
(A subscription or other fee may be required to access full-text articles.)
Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine
The NCI Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine (OCCAM) coordinates
the activities of the NCI in the area of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM).
OCCAM supports CAM cancer research and provides information about cancer-related CAM
to health providers and the general public via the NCI website.
National Cancer Institute (NCI) Cancer Information Service
U.S. residents may call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, toll free at
1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237) Monday through Friday from 9:00 am to 9:00 pm. A
trained Cancer Information Specialist is available to answer your questions.
Food and Drug Administration
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates drugs and medical devices to ensure that
they are safe and effective.
Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Avenue

[page 9]
Silver Spring, MD 20993
Telephone: 1-888-463-6332 (toll free)
Website: http://www.fda.gov
Federal Trade Commission
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) enforces consumer protection laws. Publications
available from the FTC include:
Who Cares: Sources of Information About Health Care Products and Services
Fraudulent Health Claims: Don’t Be Fooled
Consumer Response Center
Federal Trade Commission
600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20580
Telephone: 1-877-FTC-HELP (1-877-382-4357) (toll free)
TTY (for deaf and hard of hearing callers): 202-326-2502
Website: http://www.ftc.gov
Updated: May 28, 2024
If you would like to reproduce some or all of this content, see Reuse of NCI Information for
guidance about copyright and permissions. In the case of permitted digital reproduction, please
credit the National Cancer Institute as the source and link to the original NCI product using the
original product's title; e.g., “Intravenous Vitamin C (PDQ®)–Patient Version was originally
published by the National Cancer Institute.”
Want to use this content on your website or other digital platform? Our syndication
services page shows you how.
•
•