

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Iodization of salt for
the prevention and
control of iodine
deficiency disorders
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Iodine is essential for healthy brain development in the fetus and young child. Iodine
deficiency negatively affects the health of women, as well as economic productivity and
quality of life.
Most people need an additional source of iodine as it is found in relatively small
amounts in the diet. Iodization is the process of fortifying salt for human consumption
with iodine and is an effective strategy to increase iodine intake at the population level.

[page 2]
The public health goals of reducing salt and increasing iodine intake through salt
iodization are compatible as the concentration of iodine in salt can be adjusted as
needed. Monitoring the levels of iodine in salt and the iodine status of the population
are critical for ensuring that the population's needs are met and not exceeded.
WHO Recommendations
All food-grade salt, used in household and food processing should be fortified with
iodine as a safe and effective strategy for the prevention and control of iodine
deficiency disorders in populations living in stable and emergency settings.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: fortification of food-grade salt with iodine for the prevention
and control of iodine deficiency disorders
Assessment of iodine deficiency disorders and monitoring their
elimination: a guide for programme managers, 3rd ed
Recommended iodine levels in salt and guidelines for monitoring their
adequacy and effectiveness
Iodine and health: eliminating iodine deficiency disorders safely
through salt iodization
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effect and safety of salt iodization to prevent iodine deficiency disorders: A systematic review
with meta-analyses
Aburto NJ, Abudou M, Candeias V, Wu T. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014.
Related Cochrane reviews
Iodine fortification of foods and condiments, other than salt, for preventing iodine deficiency
disorders
Santos JAR, Christoforou A, Trieu K, McKenzie BL, Downs S, Billot L, et al. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2019; Issue 2. Art. No.: CD010734.
Iodized salt for the prevention of iodine deficiency disorders
Wu T, Liu GJ, Li P, Clar C. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2002; Issue 3. Art. No.: CD003204.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Fortified salt for preventing iodine deficiency disorders: a systematic review
Jiang T, Xue Q. Chinese Journal of Evidence-Based Medicine. 2010; 7:857–861.
Iodized salt for iodine deficiency disorders: a systematic review
Clar C, Wub T, Liub G, Lic P. Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinics of North America. 2002; 31(3):681–698.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Cost-effectiveness Analysis of Iodine Fortification in Australia and New Zealand

[page 4]
Centre for Health Economics Research and Evaluation; 2007.
The effectiveness & cost-effectiveness of mandatory folic acid and iodine fortification
Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council; 2017.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO