

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Iodine
supplementation in
pregnant and lactating
women
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Iodine is essential for healthy brain development in the fetus and young child. A
woman’s iodine requirements increase substantially during pregnancy to ensure
adequate supply to the fetus.
Most foods are relatively low in iodine content. To ensure that everyone has a sufficient
intake of iodine, WHO and UNICEF recommend universal salt iodization as a global
strategy. However, in certain countries salt iodization may not be feasible in all regions.
Evidence suggests that in settings where universal salt iodization is not fully

[page 2]
implemented, pregnant and lactating women and children under two years of age may
not be receiving adequate amounts of iodized salt.
Depending on the percentage of households in a particular area with access to iodized
salt, iodine supplementation may be necessary to ensure pregnant women are
receiving adequate intake.
WHO Recommendations
WHO and UNICEF recommend iodine supplementation for pregnant and lactating
women in countries where less than 20% of households have access to iodized salt,
until the salt iodization programme is scaled up.
Countries with a household access to iodized salt between 20 and 90% should make
efforts to accelerate salt iodization or assess the feasibility of increasing iodine intake in
the form of a supplement or iodine fortified foods by the most susceptible groups.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Reaching optimal iodine nutrition in Pregnant and Lactating Women
and Young Children
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Iodine supplementation for women during the preconception, pregnancy and postpartum
period

[page 3]
Harding KB, Peña-Rosas JP, Webster AC, Yap CMY, Payne BA, Ota E, De-Regil LM.Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD011761.
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews
The Effects of Iodine Deficiency in Pregnancy and Infancy
Zimmermann MB. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology. 2012; 26: 108–117.
Iodine and mental development of children 5 years old and under: a systematic review and
meta-analysis
Bougma K, Aboud FE, Harding KB, Marquis GS. Nutrients. 2013;5:1384-416.
Effect of iodine supplementation in pregnancy on child development and other clinical
outcomes: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials
Zhou SJ, Anderson AJ, Gibson RA, Makrides M. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2013; 98(5):1241-54.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Costs and benefits of iodine supplementation for pregnant women in a mildly to moderately
iodine-deficient population: a modelling analysis
Monahan M, Boelaert K, Jolly K, Chan S, Barton P, Roberts TE. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015; 3(9):715-
22.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 2 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions

[page 4]
This intervention is an Essential
Nutrition Action targeting the first 1000
days of life.
Learn More 
Iodine in pregnancy and lactation
Iodine supplementation during
pregnancy
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Commentary
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 5]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO