

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Iron supplementation
with or without folic
acid to reduce the risk
of postpartum anaemia
in malaria-endemic
areas
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Anaemia is an important public health problem worldwide, particularly among women
of reproductive age. A substantial portion of this anaemia burden is assumed to be due
to iron deficiency. The consequences of anaemia resulting from iron deficiency during
the postpartum period (six weeks after child birth) can be serious and have long-term
health implications for the mother and her child.

[page 2]
There are limited data on the global prevalence of postpartum anaemia. Studies
conducted in high-income countries have reported that 10–30% of postpartum women
were anaemic. As anaemia is a common problem throughout the world, the prevalence
of postpartum anaemia in low- and middle-income countries may be higher.
WHO recommends daily or intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation as a public
health intervention for adult women and adolescent girls living in settings where
anaemia is highly prevalent. In the postpartum period, iron and folic acid
supplementation may also reduce the risk of anaemia by improving iron status of the
mother, including in settings where malaria is endemic.
WHO Recommendations
Oral iron supplementation, either alone or in combination with folic acid, may be
provided to postpartum women for 6–12 weeks following delivery for reducing the risk
of anaemia in settings where gestational anaemia is of public health concern.*
* WHO considers a 20% or higher population prevalence of gestational anaemia to be a
moderate public health problem
For ease of implementation and continuity of care, postpartum supplementation should
begin as early as possible after delivery and the iron supplementation regimen (e.g.
dose and whether consumed daily or weekly) should follow that used during pregnancy,
or alternatively should start with that planned for non-pregnant adult women and
adolescent girls.
In malaria-endemic areas, provision of iron and folic acid supplements should be
implemented in conjunction with measures to prevent, diagnose and treat malaria. In
areas using sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine, high doses of folic acid should be avoided, as
they may interfere with the efficacy of this antimalarial drug.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Daily iron supplementation in postpartum women
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Publication of systematic review pending
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 4]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO