

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Kangaroo mother care
to reduce morbidity
and mortality in low-
birth-weight infants
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Every year, more than 20 million infants are born weighing less than 2.5kg – over 96% of
them in developing countries. These low-birth-weight (LBW) infants are at increased risk
of early growth retardation, infectious disease, developmental delay and death during
infancy and childhood.
Conventional neonatal care of LBW infants is expensive and needs both highly skilled
personnel and permanent logistic support. Evidence suggests that kangaroo mother
care is a safe and effective alternative to conventional neonatal care, especially in

[page 2]
early, continuous and prolonged skin-to-skin contact between a mother and her
newborn
frequent and exclusive breastfeeding
early discharge from hospital.
under-resourced settings and may reduce morbidity and mortality in LBW infants as
well as increase breastfeeding. Kangaroo mother care involves:
WHO Recommendations
Kangaroo mother care is recommended for the routine care of newborns weighing
2000 g or less at birth, and should be initiated in health-care facilities as soon as the
newborns are clinically stable.
Newborns weighing 2000 g or less at birth should be provided as close to continuous
Kangaroo mother care as possible.
Intermittent Kangaroo mother care, rather than conventional care, is recommended for
newborns weighing 2000 g or less at birth, if continuous Kangaroo mother care is not
possible.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendations on interventions to improve preterm birth
outcomes
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
Kangaroo mother care: a practical guide
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Kangaroo mother care to reduce morbidity and mortality in low birthweight infants
Conde-Agudelo A, Belizán JM, Diaz-Rossello J. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011; Issue 3. Art.
No.: CD002771.
Related Cochrane reviews
Kangaroo mother care to reduce morbidity and mortality in low birthweight infants.
Conde-Agudelo A, Díaz-Rossello JL.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.:
CD002771.
Summary of this review 
Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy newborn infants
Moore ER, Bergman N, Anderson GC, Medley N.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 11.
Art. No.: CD003519.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Kangaroo Mother Care and Neonatal Outcomes: A Meta-analysis

[page 4]
Boundy EO, Dastjerdi R, Spiegelman D, Fawzi WW, Missmer SA, Lieberman E, et al. Pediatrics. 2016;
137(1):1-16.
Maternal satisfaction and clinical effect of kangaroo mother care in preterm infants: a meta‐
analysis
Yu ZB, Han SP, Xu YQ, Weng L. Chinese Journal of Evidence‐Based Medicine. 2008; 8(4):277–283.
'Kangaroo mother care' to prevent neonatal deaths due to preterm birth complications
Lawn JE, Mwansa-Kambafwile J, Horta BL, Barros FC, Cousens S. International Journal of Epidemiology.
2010; 39(Suppl. 1):i144–i154.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Kangaroo mother care for low birthweight infants: a randomized controlled trial in different
settings
Cattaneo A, Davanzo R, Worku B, Surjono A, Echeverria M, Bedri A, et al. Acta Paediatr. 1998; 87(9):976-85.
The cost-savings of implementing kangaroo mother care in Nicaragua
Broughton EI, Gomez I, Sanchez N, Vindell C. Rev Panam Salud Publica. 2013; 34(3):176-82.
Latin American Clinical Epidemiology Network Series - Paper 4: Economic evaluation of
Kangaroo Mother Care: cost utility analysis of results from a randomized controlled trial
conducted in Bogotá
Ruiz JG, Charpak N, Castillo M, Bernal A, Ríos J, Trujillo T, Córdoba MA. J Clin Epidemiol. 2017; 86:91-100.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention

[page 5]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO