

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Limiting portion sizes
to reduce the risk of
childhood overweight
and obesity
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Overweight and obese children are at higher risk of developing serious health problems
including type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, asthma and other respiratory problems,
sleep disorders and liver disease. They may also suffer from psychological effects, such
as low self-esteem, depression and social isolation. Childhood obesity also increases the
risk of obesity, noncommunicable diseases, premature death and disability in
adulthood.

[page 2]
Portion sizes of commercially available and home-prepared foods have increased over
the last several decades in many settings. Evidence from a limited number of studies
suggests that availability of larger portions is associated with an increase in total caloric
intake, which could lead to weight gain. Limiting portion size may therefore be effective
as an intervention to prevent overeating and possibly reduce the risk of overweight and
obesity among children.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint
WHO/FAO expert consultation
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Portion, package or tableware size for changing selection and consumption of food, alcohol
and tobacco
Hollands GJ, Shemilt I, Marteau TM, Jebb SA, Lewis HB, Wei Y, Higgins JPT, Ogilvie D.Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD011045.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews

[page 3]
The influence of the food environment on overweight and obesity in young children: a
systematic review
Osei-Assibey G, Dick S, Macdiarmid J, Semple S, Reilly JJ, Ellaway A et al. BMJ Open. 2012; 2(6):e001538.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Modelled Cost-Effectiveness of a Package Size Cap and a Kilojoule Reduction Intervention to
Reduce Energy Intake from Sugar-Sweetened Beverages in Australia
Crino M, Herrera AMM, Ananthapavan J, Wu JHY, Neal B, Lee YY, et al. Nutrients. 2017; 9(9).
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Limiting portion sizes to reduce the
risk of childhood overweight and
obesity
Category 2 Intervention
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Regions

Policies

About us


[page 4]
Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO