

[page 1]
Low-carbohydrate diets or balanced-carbohydrate diets:
which works better for weight loss and heart disease risks? 
Home »  Our evidence »
Key messages
• There is probably little to no difference in the weight lost by people following low-carbohydrate
weight-reducing diets (also known as 'low-carb diets') compared to the weight lost by people
following balanced-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets, for up to two years.
• Similarly, there is probably little to no difference between the diets for changes in heart disease
risks, like diastolic blood pressure, glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c, a measure of blood sugar
levels over 2-3 months) and LDL cholesterol (‘unhealthy’ cholesterol) up to two years.
• This was the case in people with and without type 2 diabetes.
What are low-carbohydrate and balanced-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets?
People spend lots of money on trying to lose weight using diets, products, foods and books, and
continue to debate about which diets are effective and safe. So, examining the scientific
evidence behind claims made is important. Low-carbohydrate diets are a broad category of
weight-reducing diets that manipulate and restrict carbohydrates, protein and fat in diets. There
are no consistent, widely-accepted definitions of these diets and different descriptions are used
(such as, 'low-carbohydrate, high-protein’, 'low-carbohydrate, high-fat', or ‘very low-
carbohydrate’).
Low-carbohydrate diets are implemented in different ways, but they restrict grains, cereals and
legumes, and other carbohydrate-containing foods; such as dairy, most fruit and certain
vegetables. These foods are then typically replaced with foods higher in fat and protein; such as
meats, eggs, cheese, butter, cream, oils. Some low-carbohydrate diets recommend eating as
desired, while others recommend restricting the amount of energy eaten. 
Balanced-carbohydrate diets contain more moderate amounts of carbohydrates, protein and
fats, in line with current healthy eating advice from health authorities. When used for weight
reduction, balanced diets recommend restricting the amount of energy eaten by guiding people
to reduce their portion sizes and choose healthier foods (e.g. lean instead of fatty meat).
Low-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets are widely promoted, marketed and commercialised as
being more effective for weight loss, and healthier, than 'balanced'-carbohydrate weight-
reducing diets.
Also available in
English
EspañolفارسیFrançais
Русский
Deutsch
Português
日本語
Bahasa Malaysia
ไทย
繁體中文
简体中文
Polski
Bahasa Indonesia

[page 2]
What did we want to find out?
We wanted to find out if low-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets were better for weight loss and
heart disease risk factors than balanced-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets in adults who were
overweight or living with obesity.
We wanted to find this out for people with and without type 2 diabetes.
What did we do?
We searched six electronic databases and trial registries for all trials* that compared low-
carbohydrate weight-reducing diets with balanced-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets in adults
who were overweight or living with obesity. The trials had to last for at least three months. We
compared and summarised the results of the trials and rated our confidence in the combined
evidence, based on factors such as study methods and sizes. 
*A trial is a type of study in which participants are assigned randomly to two or more treatment
groups. This is the best way to ensure similar groups of participants.
What did we find?
We found 61 trials involving 6925 people who were overweight or living with obesity. The biggest
trial was in 419 people and the smallest was in 20 people. All except one of the trials were
conducted in high-income countries worldwide, and nearly half were undertaken in the USA
(26). Most trials (36) were undertaken in people who did not have heart disease or risk factors.
Most people (5118 people) did not have type 2 diabetes. The average starting weight of people
across the trials was 95 kg. Most studies (37) lasted for six months or less; and the longest
studies (6) lasted for two years.
Main results
Low-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets probably result in little to no difference in weight loss
over the short term (trials lasting 3 to 8.5 months) and long term (trials lasting one to two years)
compared to balanced-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets, in people with and without type 2
diabetes. In the short term, the average difference in weight loss was about 1 kg and in the long
term, the average difference was less than 1 kg. 
People lost weight on both diets in some trials. The amount of weight lost on average varied
greatly with both diets across the trials from less than 1 kg in some trials and up to about 12 kg
in others in the short term and long term. 
Similarly, low-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets probably result in little to no difference in
diastolic blood pressure, glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) and LDL cholesterol (‘unhealthy’
cholesterol) for up to two years. 
We could not draw any conclusions about unwanted effects reported by participants because
very few trials reported these.
What are the limitations of the evidence?
We are moderately confident in the evidence. Our confidence was lowered mainly because of
concerns about how some the trials were conducted, which included that many trials did not
report all their results. Further research may change these results.

[page 3]
How up to date is this evidence?
The evidence is up-to-date to June 2021.
Background
Debates on effective and safe diets for managing obesity in adults are ongoing. Low-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets (also
known as 'low-carb diets') continue to be widely promoted, marketed and commercialised as being more effective for weight loss,
and healthier, than 'balanced'-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets.
Objectives
To compare the effects of low-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets to weight-reducing diets with balanced ranges of
carbohydrates, in relation to changes in weight and cardiovascular risk, in overweight and obese adults without and with type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
Search strategy
We searched MEDLINE (PubMed), Embase (Ovid), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Web of Science
Core Collection (Clarivate Analytics), ClinicalTrials.gov and WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) up to 25
June 2021, and screened reference lists of included trials and relevant systematic reviews. Language or publication restrictions
were not applied.
Selection criteria
We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in adults (18 years+) who were overweight or living with obesity, without or with
T2DM, and without or with cardiovascular conditions or risk factors. Trials had to compare low-carbohydrate weight-reducing
diets to balanced-carbohydrate (45% to 65% of total energy (TE)) weight-reducing diets, have a weight-reducing phase of 2 weeks
or longer and be explicitly implemented for the primary purpose of reducing weight, with or without advice to restrict energy
intake. 
Data collection and analysis
Two review authors independently screened titles and abstracts and full‐text articles to determine eligibility; and independently
extracted data, assessed risk of bias using RoB 2 and assessed the certainty of the evidence using GRADE. We stratified analyses by
participants without and with T2DM, and by diets with weight-reducing phases only and those with weight-reducing phases
followed by weight-maintenance phases. Primary outcomes were change in body weight (kg) and the number of participants per
group with weight loss of at least 5%, assessed at short- (three months to < 12 months) and long-term (≥ 12 months) follow-up.
Main results
We included 61 parallel-arm RCTs that randomised 6925 participants to either low-carbohydrate or balanced-carbohydrate
weight-reducing diets. All trials were conducted in high-income countries except for one in China. Most participants (n = 5118
randomised) did not have T2DM. Mean baseline weight across trials was 95 kg (range 66 to 132 kg). Participants with T2DM were
older (mean 57 years, range 50 to 65) than those without T2DM (mean 45 years, range 22 to 62). Most trials included men and
women (42/61; 3/19 men only; 16/19 women only), and people without baseline cardiovascular conditions, risk factors or events
(36/61). Mean baseline diastolic blood pressure (DBP) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol across trials were within
normal ranges. The longest weight-reducing phase of diets was two years in participants without and with T2DM. Evidence from
studies with weight-reducing phases followed by weight-maintenance phases was limited.
Most trials investigated low-carbohydrate diets (> 50 g to 150 g per day or < 45% of TE; n = 42), followed by very low (≤ 50 g per
day or < 10% of TE; n = 14), and then incremental increases from very low to low (n = 5). The most common diets compared were
low-carbohydrate, balanced-fat (20 to 35% of TE) and high-protein (> 20% of TE) treatment diets versus control diets balanced for
the three macronutrients (24/61). In most trials (45/61) the energy prescription or approach used to restrict energy intake was
similar in both groups. We assessed the overall risk of bias of outcomes across trials as predominantly high, mostly from bias due
to missing outcome data. Using GRADE, we assessed the certainty of evidence as moderate to very low across outcomes. 
Participants without and with T2DM lost weight when following weight-reducing phases of both diets at the short (range: 12.2 to
0.33 kg) and long term (range: 13.1 to 1.7 kg). 
In overweight and obese participants without T2DM: low-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets compared to balanced-carbohydrate
weight-reducing diets (weight-reducing phases only) probably result in little to no difference in change in body weight over three
Read the full abstract

[page 4]
Website Terms & Conditions | Disclaimer | Privacy | Cookie policy |
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
11-13 Cavendish Square
London
W1G 0AN
United Kingdom
The Cochrane Collaboration is a charity (no. 1045921) and a company limited by guarantee (no. 03044323) registered in England & Wales. VAT registration number GB
718 2127 49.
Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration
to 8.5 months (mean difference (MD) −1.07 kg, (95% confidence interval (CI) −1.55 to −0.59, I  = 51%, 3286 participants, 37
RCTs, moderate-certainty evidence) and over one to two years (MD −0.93 kg, 95% CI −1.81 to −0.04, I  = 40%, 1805 participants, 14
RCTs, moderate-certainty evidence); as well as change in DBP and LDL cholesterol over one to two years. The evidence is very
uncertain about whether there is a difference in the number of participants per group with weight loss of at least 5% at one year
(risk ratio (RR) 1.11, 95% CI 0.94 to 1.31, I  = 17%, 137 participants, 2 RCTs, very low-certainty evidence). 
In overweight and obese participants with T2DM: low-carbohydrate weight-reducing diets compared to balanced-carbohydrate
weight-reducing diets (weight-reducing phases only) probably result in little to no difference in change in body weight over three
to six months (MD −1.26 kg, 95% CI −2.44 to −0.09, I = 47%, 1114 participants, 14 RCTs, moderate-certainty evidence) and over one
to two years (MD −0.33 kg, 95% CI −2.13 to 1.46, I = 10%, 813 participants, 7 RCTs, moderate-certainty evidence); as well in change
in DBP, HbA1c and LDL cholesterol over 1 to 2 years. The evidence is very uncertain about whether there is a difference in the
number of participants per group with weight loss of at least 5% at one to two years (RR 0.90, 95% CI 0.68 to 1.20, I  = 0%, 106
participants, 2 RCTs, very low-certainty evidence). 
Evidence on participant-reported adverse effects was limited, and we could not draw any conclusions about these. 
Authors' conclusions
There is probably little to no difference in weight reduction and changes in cardiovascular risk factors up to two years' follow-up,
when overweight and obese participants without and with T2DM are randomised to either low-carbohydrate or balanced-
carbohydrate weight-reducing diets. 
Citation
Naude CE, BrandA, SchooneesA, NguyenKA, ChaplinM, VolminkJ.Low-carbohydrate versus balanced-carbohydrate diets for reducing weight
and cardiovascular risk. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2022, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD013334. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD013334.pub2.
2
2
2
2 
2 
2
Authors
Naude CE, Brand A, Schoonees A, Nguyen KA, Chaplin M, Volmink J
Published
28 January 2022
Full review on the Cochrane
Library