

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Management of severe
acute malnutrition in
individuals with active
tuberculosis
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In 2012 there were an estimated 8.6 million new cases of tuberculosis (TB) globally. TB
morbidity and mortality are highest in developing countries.
Undernutrition increases the risk of tuberculosis and vice-versa and, as a result,
undernutrition is highly prevalent among people with tuberculosis. Young children and
pregnant women are particularly vulnerable to the effects of undernutrition and TB.
Women with TB may be at higher risk for pre-eclampsia and other complications during

[page 2]
Children under 5 years of age: very low weight-for-height/weight-for-length, or
clinical signs of bilateral pitting oedema, or very low mid-upper arm circumference
(children 6–59 months of age only)
School-age children and adolescents 5–19 years of age: very low BMI*-for-age
Adults: very low BMI
Pregnant women: very low mid-upper arm circumference
pregnancy. TB also increases the risk of premature birth, low birth weight and perinatal
death.
Severe acute malnutrition is identified differently in different age groups:
Those suffering from severe acute malnutrition are particularly susceptible to the
negative health effects of tuberculosis.
WHO Recommendations
School-age children and adolescents (5–19 years of age), and adults, including pregnant
and lactating women, with active TB and severe acute malnutrition should be treated in
accordance with the WHO recommendations for management of severe acute
malnutrition (IAMI manual, Technical note).
Children who are less than 5 years of age with active TB and severe acute malnutrition
should be treated in accordance with the WHO recommendations for the management
of severe acute malnutrition in children who are less than 5 years of age (updated
guideline on management of SAM).
* BMI = body mass index, kg/m2
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidance for national tuberculosis programmes on the management of
tuberculosis in children, 2nd ed
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Nutritional care and support for patients with tuberculosis
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Integrated management of adolescent and adult illness (IMAI) district
clinician manual: Hospital care for adolescents and adults
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
The effectiveness of interventions to treat severe acute malnutrition in young children: a
systematic review
Picot J, Hartwell D , Harris P, Mendes D, Clegg AJ, and Takeda A. Health Technology Assessment. 2012;
Vol.16:No.19(for Guideline: Updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and
children).
Nutritional supplements for people being treated for active tuberculosis
Sinclair D, Abba K, Grobler L, Sudarsanam TD. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011; Issue 11.
Art. No.: CD006086.
Related Cochrane reviews
Nutritional supplements for people being treated for active tuberculosis.

[page 4]
Grobler L, Nagpal S, Sudarsanam TD, Sinclair D.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 6.
Art. No.: CD006086.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.

[page 5]
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 6]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO