

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Management of infants
under 6 months of age
with severe acute
malnutrition
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In infants who are under 6 months of age, severe acute malnutrition is defined by a
very low weight-for-length or the presence of bilateral pitting oedema. Severe acute
malnutrition is increasingly being recognized in infants under 6 months of age and is
often associated with higher mortality in young infants than in older infants and
children.
In addition to causative factors such as low birth weight, persistent diarrhoea and
chronic underlying diseases or disability, the development of severe acute malnutrition

[page 2]
in infants under 6 months of age commonly reflects suboptimal feeding practices,
especially breastfeeding practices.
There are important physiological differences between young infants and older children
that may require modified management approaches or clinical interventions. Clinical
signs of infection and hydration status may also be more difficult to identify and
interpret in the younger infant. WHO has developed a set of recommendations for the
identification and management of severe acute malnutrition in infants who are under 6
months of age.
WHO Recommendations
Infants who are under 6 months of age with severe acute malnutrition should receive
the same general medical care as infants with severe acute malnutrition who are 6
months of age or older.
Feeding approaches for infants who are under 6 months of age with severe acute
malnutrition should prioritize establishing, or re-establishing, effective exclusive
breastfeeding by the mother or other caregiver.
Infants under 6 months of age can be discharged from all care when they are: i)
breastfeeding effectively or feeding well with replacement feeds, ii) have adequate
weight gain and iii) have a weight-for-length ≥–2 Z-scores of the WHO Child Growth
Standards median.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Management of the child with a serious infection or severe
malnutrition
Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
The effectiveness of interventions to treat severe acute malnutrition in young children: a
systematic review
Picot J, Hartwell D , Harris P, Mendes D, Clegg AJ, and Takeda A. Health Technology Assessment. 2012;
Vol.16:No.19(for Guideline: Updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and
children).
Inpatient treatment of severe acute malnutrition in infants aged 6 months
pdf, 1.19Mb Kerac M, Tehran I, Lelijveld N, Onyekpe I, Berkley J, Manary M. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2012.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on

[page 4]
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.
Category 1 Intervention

[page 5]
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is a component of
managing children with SAM, which is
an Essential Nutrition Action targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 6]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO