

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Management of HIV-
infected children under
5 years of age with
severe acute
malnutrition
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In children who are under 5 years of age, severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very
low weight-for-height/weight-for-length or clinical signs of bilateral pitting oedema. A
very low mid-upper arm circumference also indicates severe acute malnutrition in
children who are 6–59 months of age. Severe acute malnutrition affects an estimated 19
million children under 5 years of age worldwide and is estimated to account for
approximately 400,000 child deaths each year.

[page 2]
HIV infection and undernutrition often affect the same populations, particularly in
resource-limited settings, and moderate or severe acute malnutrition commonly affects
HIV-infected children. HIV-infection increases susceptibility to persistent diarrhoea and
opportunistic infections which can greatly impact the health of severely malnourished
children and HIV-infected children with severe acute malnutrition are nearly three times
more likely to die during treatment (for severe acute malnutrition), compared to their
HIV-negative counterparts.
WHO Recommendations
Children under 5 years of age with severe acute malnutrition who are HIV-infected and
who qualify for lifelong antiretroviral therapy should be started on antiretroviral drug
treatment as soon as possible after stabilization of metabolic complications and sepsis.
Children under 5 years of age with severe acute malnutrition who are HIV-infected
should be managed with the same therapeutic feeding approaches as children with
severe acute malnutrition who are not HIV-infected.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating
and preventing HIV infection (2013)
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Guidelines for intensified tuberculosis case-finding and isoniazid
preventive therapy for people living with HIV in resource-constrained
settings
Antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in infants and children - 2010
Guidelines for an integrated approach to nutritional care of HIV-
infected children (6 month-14 years)
Diarrhoea treatment guidelines including new recommendations for
the use of ORS and zinc supplementation for clinic-based healthcare
workers
Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers
Other guidance documents
Evidence

[page 4]
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Systematic review of the care of HIV-infected children with severe acute malnutrition
pdf, 352kb Manary M, Trehan I, Willumsen J. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria

[page 5]
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is a component of
managing children with SAM, which is
an Essential Nutrition Action targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 6]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO