

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Management of severe
acute malnutrition in
children 6–59 months
of age with oedema
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In children who are 6–59 months of age, severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very
low weight-for-height/weight-for-length, or clinical signs of bilateral pitting oedema, or
a very low mid-upper arm circumference. Severe acute malnutrition affects an
estimated 19 million children under 5 years of age worldwide and is estimated to
account for approximately 400,000 child deaths each year.
Oedema is a swelling caused by the accumulation of fluid in the body tissues and can be
categorized as

[page 2]
Mild (+): oedema in both feet/ankles
Moderate (++): oedema in both feet plus lower legs, hands or lower arms
Severe (+++): generalized oedema including both feet, legs, hands, arms and face
Children with severe acute malnutrition who have severe oedema (+++) have an
increased risk of mortality compared to children with severe acute malnutrition but with
lesser degrees of oedema.
WHO Recommendations
Children 6–59 months of age with severe acute malnutrition who have severe oedema
(+++), even if they present with no medical complications and have appetite, should be
admitted for inpatient care.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
Joint statement on the community-based management of severe acute
malnutrition
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Management of oedematous malnutrition in infants and children aged >6 months: a
systematic review of the evidence
pdf, 673kb Roberfroid D, Hammami N, Mehta P, Lachat C, Verstraeten R, Prinzo ZW, et al. Geneva: World
Health Organization; 2013.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana

[page 4]
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is a component of
managing children with SAM, which is
an Essential Nutrition Action targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions

[page 5]
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO