

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Management of
moderate
undernutrition in
individuals with active
tuberculosis
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In 2012 there were an estimated 8.6 million new cases of tuberculosis (TB) globally. TB
morbidity and mortality are highest in developing countries.
Undernutrition increases the risk of tuberculosis and vice-versa and, as a result,
undernutrition is highly prevalent among people with tuberculosis. Young children and
pregnant women are particularly vulnerable to the effects of undernutrition and TB.
Women with TB may be at higher risk for pre-eclampsia and other complications during

[page 2]
pregnancy. TB also increases the risk of premature birth, low birth weight and perinatal
death.
Moderate undernutrition, specifically moderate acute malnutrition, is defined by a low
weight-for-height without visible oedema. Those suffering from moderate acute
malnutrition are at a heightened susceptibility to the negative health effects of
tuberculosis.
WHO Recommendations
Children who are under 5 years of age with active TB and moderate undernutrition
should be managed as any other children with moderate undernutrition, including
provision of supplementary foods*, in order to restore appropriate weight-for-height.
Pregnant women with active TB and moderate undernutrition, or with inadequate
weight gain, should be provided with supplementary foods*, as necessary to achieve an
average weekly minimum weight gain of approximately 300 g in the second and third
trimesters.
Patients with active multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB) and moderate undernutrition
should be provided with supplementary foods*, as necessary to restore normal
nutritional status.
* locally available nutrient-rich or fortified supplementary foods
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidance for national tuberculosis programmes on the management of
tuberculosis in children, 2nd ed
Nutritional care and support for patients with tuberculosis
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Technical note: supplementary foods for the management of moderate
acute malnutrition in infants and children 6–59 months of age
Integrated management of adolescent and adult illness (IMAI) district
clinician manual: Hospital care for adolescents and adults
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Nutritional supplements for people being treated for active tuberculosis
Sinclair D, Abba K, Grobler L, Sudarsanam TD. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011; Issue 11.
Art. No.: CD006086.
Related Cochrane reviews
Specially formulated foods for treating children with moderate acute malnutrition in low- and
middle-income countries
Lazzerini M, Rubert L, Pani P. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2013; Issue 6. Art. No.: CD009584.
Summary of this review 
Nutritional supplements for people being treated for active tuberculosis.
Grobler L, Nagpal S, Sudarsanam TD, Sinclair D.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 6.
Art. No.: CD006086.
Summary of this review

[page 4]
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 5]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO