

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Marine oil
supplementation
during pregnancy
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids may help regulate a number of biological
processes including those that are important during pregnancy and delivery.
Marine foods are rich sources of n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids and
evidence from observational studies has suggested a potential association between
consumption of marine foods during pregnancy and reduced risk of certain adverse
health outcomes such as pre-eclampsia, preterm birth and low birth weight.
Current evidence suggests that supplementation with n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated
fatty acids is associated with a reduced risk of preterm delivery and modest increase in

[page 2]
birth weight, however further research is needed before specific recommendations can
be made.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Omega‐3 fatty acid addition during pregnancy
Middleton P, Gomersall JC, Gould JF, Shepherd E, Olsen SF, Makrides M. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2018; Issue 11. Art. No.: CD003402.
Other related systematic reviews
Effect of n-3 Long-chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid Intake during Pregnancy on Maternal,
Infant, and Child Health Outcomes: A Systematic Review
Imhoff-Kunsch B, Briggs V, Goldenberg T and Ramakrishnan U. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology.
2012; 26:91–107.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
Category 2 intervention

[page 3]
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Marine oil supplementation to
improve pregnancy outcomes
Marine oil supplementation in
pregnancy and maternal and
neonatal health outcomes
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Commentary
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 4]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO