

[page 1]
Metabolism and weight loss: How
you burn calories
Find out how metabolism affects weight, the truth behind slow
metabolism and how to burn more calories.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Jan. 20, 2026
Some people worry that their weight is caused by the way their body breaks
down food into energy, also known as metabolism. They think their metabolism is
too slow. But is that really the cause? If so, is it possible to speed up the process?
It's true that the rate the body breaks down food is linked to weight. But slow
metabolism isn't usually the cause of weight gain.
Metabolism does help affect how much energy a body needs. But weight
depends on how much a person eats and drinks combined with physical activity.
Metabolism: Converting food into energy
Metabolism is the process by which the body changes food and drink into energy.
During this process, calories in food and drinks mix with oxygen to make the
energy the body needs.
Even at rest, a body needs energy for all it does. This includes breathing, sending
blood through the body, keeping hormone levels even, and growing and repairing
cells. The number of calories a body at rest uses to do these things is known as
the basal metabolic rate, also called basal metabolism.

[page 2]
Muscle mass is a key factor in basal metabolic rate. Basal metabolic rate also
depends on other factors such as:
Body size and composition. People who are larger or have more muscle burn
more calories, even at rest.
Sex. Men usually have less body fat and more muscle than women of the
same age and weight. That means men burn more calories.
Age. With aging, people tend to lose muscle. More of the body's weight is
from fat, which slows calorie burning.
Besides the basal metabolic rate, two other things affect how many calories a
body burns each day:
How the body uses food. Digesting, absorbing, moving and storing food burn
calories. About 10% of calories eaten are used for digesting food and taking
in nutrients. You can't change this much.
How much a body moves. Any movement, such as playing tennis, walking to
a store or chasing the dog, makes up the rest of the calories a body burns
each day. You can change this a lot, both by doing more exercise and by
moving more during the day.
Daily activity that isn't exercise is called nonexercise activity thermogenesis
(NEAT). This includes activities such as walking around the house, gardening,
housework and even fidgeting. NEAT accounts for about 100 to 800 calories
used daily.
Metabolism and weight
You might think a medical condition is a cause of slow metabolism and weight
gain. But medical conditions rarely slow metabolism enough to cause a lot of
weight gain. Conditions that can cause weight gain include Cushing syndrome or
having an underactive thyroid gland, also called hypothyroidism. These conditions
are uncommon.
Many things affect weight gain. These likely include genes, hormones, diet and
lifestyle, such as sleep, physical activity and stress. You gain weight when you eat
more calories than you burn — or burn fewer calories than you eat.
Some people seem to lose weight more quickly and more easily than others. But
everyone loses weight by burning more calories than they eat. The bottom line is

[page 3]
calories count. To lose weight, you need to eat fewer calories or burn more
calories through physical activity. Or you can do both.
A closer look at physical activity and metabolism
You can't easily manage the speed of your basal metabolic rate, but you can affect
how many calories you burn through physical activity. The more active you are,
the more calories you burn. In fact, some people who seem to have a fast
metabolism are probably just more active — and maybe fidget more — than
others.
The Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans recommends the following to burn
more calories:
Aerobic activity. As a general goal, aim for at least 150 minutes of moderate
aerobic activity a week. Or get at least 75 minutes of vigorous aerobic
activity a week. You also can get an equal mix of the two types.
For even more health benefits, get 300 minutes a week or more of moderate
aerobic activity. Exercising this much may help with weight loss or keeping
off lost weight. But even small amounts of physical activity can be helpful.
Being active for short periods of time during the day can add up and have
health benefits.
Moderate aerobic exercise includes activities such as brisk walking, biking,
swimming and mowing the lawn. Aim for a brisk walk for 30 minutes five
days a week to meet your goal. Vigorous aerobic exercise includes activities
such as running, heavy yardwork and aerobic dancing.
Strength training. Do strength training exercises for all major muscle groups
at least two times a week. One set of each exercise is enough for health and
fitness benefits. Use a weight or resistance level heavy enough to tire your
muscles after about 12 to 15 repetitions.
Strength training can include the use of weight machines, your own body
weight, heavy bags, resistance tubing or resistance paddles in the water, or
activities such as rock climbing.

[page 4]
No quick fix
Don't rely on dietary supplements for help in burning calories or losing weight.
Products that claim to speed up metabolism usually don't live up to their claims.
Some may cause bad side effects.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration doesn't ask for proof that dietary
supplements are safe or that they work. Question the claims that are made.
Always let your healthcare professionals know about supplements you take.
There's no easy way to lose weight. To take in fewer calories than you burn, aim to
cut 500 to 750 calories a day to lose 1 to 1.5 pounds (0.5 to 0.7 kilograms) a week.
Add more physical activity to get to your weight-loss goals faster and maintain
your weight loss.
A healthcare professional, such as a doctor or registered dietitian, can help you
explore ways to lose weight.
1. Goldman L, et al., eds. Obesity. In: Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Elsevier; 2020.
https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Sept. 13, 2022.
2. Benefits of physical activity. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
https://www.cdc.gov/physical-activity-basics/benefits/index.html. Accessed Aug. 21, 2025.
3. Perreault L, et al. Obesity: Genetic contribution and pathophysiology.
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Sept. 13, 2022.
4. Piaggi P. Metabolic determinants of weight gain in humans. Obesity. 2019;
doi:10.1002/oby.22456.
5. 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
and U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov. Accessed Aug. 20, 2025.
6. Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. 2nd ed. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. https://health.gov/our-work/physical-activity/current-guidelines. Accessed Sept. 19,
2022.
7. Dietary supplements for weight loss: Fact sheet for health professionals. National Institutes of
Health. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/WeightLoss-HealthProfessional. Accessed Sept. 17,
2022.
8. AskMayoExpert. Physical activity (adult). Mayo Clinic; 2024.

[page 5]
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Notice of Nondiscrimination
Digital Accessibility Statement
Advertising & Sponsorship Policy
Site Map
© 1998-2026 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER).
All rights reserved.
ART-20046508