

[page 1]
HarvardHealthOnline+
RECENT ARTICLES
HEALTHY AGING AND LONGEVITY
Microwaving food in plastic: Dangerous or not?
September 20, 2017
Let's cover the original misinformation first: The
earliest missives warned that microwaved plastic
releases cancer-causing chemicals called dioxins into
food. The problem with that warning is that plastics
don't contain dioxins. They are created when garbage,
plastics, metals, wood, and other materials are burned.
As long as you don't burn your food in a microwave,
you aren't exposing yourself to dioxins.
Migrating chemicals
There's no single substance called "plastic." That term
covers many materials made from an array of organic
and inorganic compounds. Substances are often added
to plastic to help shape or stabilize it. Two of these
plasticizers are
bisphenol-A (BPA), added to make clear, hard plastic
phthalates, added to make plastic soft and flexible
Beef tallow, seed oils, and
full-fat dairy: Are any of
them heart-healthy?
Cardiac amyloidosis:
Better detection and new
treatments
Stay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School.
Plus, get a FREE copy of Living Longer, Living Well.
Enter Your Email
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
SIGN ME UP

[page 2]
BPA and phthalates are believed to be "endocrine disrupters." These are substances that
mimic human hormones, and not for the good.
When food is wrapped in plastic or placed in a plastic container and microwaved, BPA
and phthalates may leak into the food. Any migration is likely to be greater with fatty
foods such as meats and cheeses than with other foods.
The FDA long ago recognized the potential for small amounts of plasticizers to migrate
into food. So it closely regulates plastic containers and materials that come into contact
with food. The FDA requires manufacturers to test these containers using tests that meet
FDA standards and specifications. It then reviews test data before approving a container
for microwave use.
Some of these tests measure the migration of chemicals at temperatures that the
container or wrap is likely to encounter during ordinary use. For microwave approval,
the agency estimates the ratio of plastic surface area to food, how long the container is
likely to be in the microwave, how often a person is likely to eat from the container, and
how hot the food can be expected to get during microwaving. The scientists also
Smart strategies for achieving and maintaining a healthy
weight
Lose Weight and Keep It Off
Successful weight loss depends largely on becoming
more aware of your behaviors and starting to change
them. Instead of relying on willpower, this process
demands skill power. This Special Health Report, Lose
Weight and Keep It Off, offers a range of solutions that
have worked for many people and can be tailored to your
needs.
LEARN MORE!
Stay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School.
Plus, get a FREE copy of Living Longer, Living Well.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

[page 3]
measure the chemicals that leach into food and the extent to which they migrate in
different kinds of foods. The maximum allowable amount is 100–1,000 times less per
pound of body weight than the amount shown to harm laboratory animals over a
lifetime of use. Only containers that pass this test can display a microwave-safe icon, the
words "microwave safe," or words to the effect that they're approved for use in
microwave ovens.
What about containers without a microwave-safe label? They aren't necessarily unsafe;
the FDA simply hasn't determined whether it is or not.
Is Styrofoam microwave safe?
Contrary to popular belief, some Styrofoam and other polystyrene containers can safely
be used in the microwave. Just follow the same rule you follow for using other plastic
containers in the microwave: Check the label.
The bottom line
Here are some things to keep in mind when using the microwave:
If you're concerned about plastic wraps or containers in the microwave, transfer
food to glass or ceramic containers labeled for use in microwave ovens.
Don't let plastic wrap touch food during microwaving because it may melt. Wax
paper, kitchen parchment paper, white paper towels, or a domed container that fits
over a plate or bowl are better alternatives.
Most takeout containers, water bottles, and plastic tubs or jars made to hold
margarine, yogurt, whipped topping, and foods such as cream cheese, mayonnaise,
and mustard are not microwave-safe.
Microwavable takeout dinner trays are formulated for one-time use only and will
say so on the package.
Old, scratched, or cracked containers, or those that have been microwaved many
times, may leach out more plasticizers.
Don't microwave plastic storage bags or plastic bags from the grocery store.
Before microwaving food, be sure to vent the container: leave the lid ajar, or lift the
edge of the cover.
Stay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School.
Plus, get a FREE copy of Living Longer, Living Well.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

[page 4]
Learn about "Microwave cooking and nutrition."
image: © Brad Calkins | Dreamstime.com
Disclaimer:
As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of
archived content. Please note the date of last review or update on all articles.
No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct
medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.
Related Topics
Jump-start a healthier New Year
with four holiday eating tips
21 spices for healthy holiday
foods
Eat these fruits for their anti-
inflammatory benefits
DIET AND NUTRITION
DIET AND NUTRITION
DIET AND NUTRITION
Stay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School.
Plus, get a FREE copy of Living Longer, Living Well.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

[page 5]
DIET AND NUTRITION
FREE HEALTHBEAT SIGNUP
Get the latest in health news delivered to your inbox!
SIGN UP
© 2026 Harvard Health Publishing® of The
President and Fellows of Harvard College
Do not sell my personal information |
Privacy Policy and Terms of Use
Stay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School.
Plus, get a FREE copy of Living Longer, Living Well.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.