

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Micronutrient
supplementation in
low-birth-weight and
very-low-birth-weight
infants
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Every year, more than 20 million infants are born weighing less than 2.5 kg – over 96%
of them in developing countries. These low-birth-weight (LBW) infants are at increased
risk of early growth retardation, infectious disease, developmental delay and death
during infancy and childhood. Very-low-birth-weight (VLBW) infants - those infants born
weighing less than 1.5 kg - are particularly vulnerable to the these adverse outcomes.

[page 2]
Most LBW and VLBW is a consequence of preterm birth, small size for gestational age,
or both.
Interventions to improve the feeding of LBW and VLBW infants are likely to improve the
immediate and longer-term health and well-being of the individual infant and have a
significant impact on neonatal and infant mortality levels in the population.
LBW infants, particularly VLBW infants, are frequently deficient in one or more
micronutrients, which may impact normal growth and development. Supplementation
with certain micronutrients may therefore reduce the risk of some complications
associated with LBW and VLBW.
WHO Recommendations
The recommendations below do not address sick infants or infants with birth
weight less than 1.0 kg. Recommendations for VLBW infants specifically address
those infants with birth weight between 1.0 and 1.5 kg.
Daily oral vitamin A supplementation for LBW infants who are fed mother's own milk or
donor human milk is not recommended at the present time, because there is not
enough evidence of benefits to support such a recommendation.
Routine zinc supplementation for LBW infants who are fed mother's own milk or donor
human milk is not recommended at the present time, because there is not enough
evidence of benefits to support such a recommendation.
VLBW infants should be given vitamin D supplements at a dose ranging from 400 IU to
1000 IU per day until 6 months of age.
VLBW infants who are fed mother’s own milk or donor human milk should be given
daily calcium (120–140 mg/kg per day) and phosphorus (60–90 mg/kg per day)
supplementation during the first months of life.
VLBW infants fed mother’s own milk or donor human milk should be given 2–4 mg/kg
per day iron supplementation starting at 2 weeks until 6 months of age.
IU = international unit
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Guidelines on optimal feeding of low birth-weight infants in low- and
middle-income countries
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Optimal feeding of low-birth-weight infants: technical review
Edmond K, Bahl R. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006.
Related Cochrane reviews
Enteral iron supplementation in preterm and low birth weight infants
Mills RJ, Davies MW.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD005095.
Summary of this review 
Vitamin A supplementation to prevent mortality and short- and long-term morbidity in very
low birth weight infants
Darlow BA, Graham PJ, Rojas-Reyes MX.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.:
CD000501.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Benefits of iron supplementation for low birth weight infants: a systematic review
Long H, Yi JM, Hu PL, Li ZB, Qiu WY, Wang F and Zhu S. BMC Pediatrics. 2012; 12:99.
Neonatal zinc supplementation for prevention of mortality and morbidity in breastfed low
birth weight infants: systematic review of randomized controlled trials
Gulani A, Bhatnagar S, Sachdev HP. Indian Pediatrics. 2011; 48(2):111-7.

[page 4]
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO