

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Micronutrient
supplementation in
individuals with active
tuberculosis
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In 2012 there were an estimated 8.6 million new cases of tuberculosis (TB) globally. TB
morbidity and mortality are highest in developing countries.
Undernutrition increases the risk of tuberculosis and vice-versa and, as a result,
undernutrition is highly prevalent among people with tuberculosis. Young children and
pregnant women are particularly vulnerable to the effects of undernutrition and TB.
Women with TB may be at higher risk for pre-eclampsia and other complications during

[page 2]
pregnancy. TB also increases the risk of premature birth, low birth weight and perinatal
death.
Low circulating concentrations of micronutrients, such as vitamins A, E and D, and iron,
zinc and selenium have been reported in some patients, though levels usually return to
normal after 2 months of appropriate TB treatment.
WHO Recommendations
A daily multiple micronutrient supplement at 1× recommended nutrient intake* should
be provided in situations where fortified or supplementary foods should have been
provided in accordance with standard management of moderate undernutrition (IAMI
manual, Technical note; see 'WHO documents' below), but are unavailable.
All pregnant and lactating women with active TB should receive multiple micronutrient
supplements that contain iron and folic acid and other vitamins and minerals, according
to the United Nations Multiple Micronutrient Preparation (UNICEF, WHO, UNU joint
report; see 'WHO documents' below) to complement their maternal micronutrient
needs.
In settings where calcium intake is low, calcium supplementation as part of antenatal
care is recommended in pregnant women with active TB for the prevention of pre-
eclampsia, particularly among those pregnant women at higher risk of developing
hypertension.
* providing the equivalent micronutrient profile recommended in the Technical note
(see WHO documents below)
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Nutritional care and support for patients with tuberculosis
Guideline: calcium supplementation in pregnant women
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
WHO recommendations for prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia
and eclampsia
Technical note: supplementary foods for the management of moderate
acute malnutrition in infants and children 6–59 months of age
IMAI district clinician manual: hospital care adolescents and adults
Composition of a multi-micronutrient supplement to be used in pilot
programmes among pregnant women in developing countries: report
of a United Nations Children's Fund (‎UNICEF)‎, World Health
Organization (‎WHO)‎ and United Nations University workshop
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Calcium supplementation during pregnancy for preventing hypertensive disorders and related
problems

[page 4]
Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah ÁN, Duley L, Torloni MR. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2014;
Issue 6. Art. No.: CD001059.
Nutritional supplements for people being treated for active tuberculosis
Sinclair D, Abba K, Grobler L, Sudarsanam TD. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011; Issue 11.
Art. No.: CD006086.
Podcast (Cochrane)
Calcium supplementation (other than for preventing or treating hypertension) for improving
pregnancy and infant outcomes"
Buppasiri P, Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J, Ngamjarus C, Laopaiboon M, Medley N. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD007079.
Summary of this review 
Related Cochrane reviews
Nutritional supplements for people being treated for active tuberculosis.
Grobler L, Nagpal S, Sudarsanam TD, Sinclair D.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 6.
Art. No.: CD006086.
Summary of this review 
Calcium supplementation during pregnancy for preventing hypertensive disorders and related
problems
Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah ÁN, Torloni MR. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2018; Issue 10.
Art. No.: CD001059.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Optimizing treatment for the prevention of pre-eclampsia/eclampsia in Nepal: is calcium
supplementation during pregnancy cost-effective?
Feldhaus I, LeFevre AE, Rai C, Bhattarai J, Russo D, Rawlins B, et al.<br>\r\nCost Eff Resour Alloc. 2016;
14:13.\r\n
Should women be advised to use calcium supplements during pregnancy? A decision analysis

[page 5]
Meertens LJE, Scheepers HCJ, Willemse JPMM, Spaanderman MEA, Smits LJM.<br>\r\nMatern Child Nutr.
2018; 14(1).\r\n
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO