

[page 1]
Milk thistle
By Mayo Clinic Staff
May 21, 2025
Overview
Milk thistle is a plant named for the white veins on its large prickly leaves.
One of the active ingredients in milk thistle called silymarin is extracted from the
plant's seeds. Silymarin is believed to have antioxidant properties.
Milk thistle is sold as an oral capsule, tablet and liquid extract. People mainly use
the supplement to treat liver conditions.
What the research says
Research on milk thistle use for specific conditions shows:
Diabetes. Milk thistle might lower blood sugar in people who have type 2
diabetes, but more studies are needed to confirm its benefits.
Indigestion (dyspepsia). Milk thistle, in combination with other supplements,
might improve the symptoms of indigestion.
Liver disease. Research on the effects of milk thistle on liver disease, such as
cirrhosis and hepatitis C, has shown mixed results.
Our take

[page 2]
Milk thistle might play a role in treating certain liver conditions.
Safety and side effects
Taken in appropriate doses, oral use of milk thistle appears to be safe.
Milk thistle can cause:
Gastrointestinal issues, such as diarrhea, constipation, nausea, vomiting and
abdominal bloating
Itchiness
Headache
If you have diabetes, use milk thistle with caution, since the supplement might
lower blood sugar. There is also concern that milk thistle might affect estrogen
levels. If you have breast cancer, uterine cancer, ovarian cancer, endometriosis or
uterine fibroids, consider avoiding milk thistle.
Milk thistle can cause an allergic reaction, including a severe, potentially life-
threatening allergic reaction (anaphylaxis). An allergic reaction is more common in
people who are allergic to other plants in the Asteraceae family, such as ragweed,
daisies, marigolds and chrysanthemums.
Interactions
Possible interactions include:
Cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) substrates. Taking milk thistle might
affect this enzyme and drugs it processes, such as diazepam (Valium),
warfarin (Jantoven) and others. This means milk thistle might affect the
levels of these drugs in your body.
Diabetes medications. Milk thistle might lower blood sugar in people who
have type 2 diabetes. Closely monitor your blood sugar levels, and talk to
your doctor before taking milk thistle supplements if you take diabetes
medications.
Generally safe

[page 3]
Raloxifene (Evista). Milk thistle may affect how your liver processes this
osteoporosis medication, causing higher levels of the drug in your
bloodstream. Talk to your doctor before taking milk thistle if you're taking
raloxifene.
Simeprevir. Taking milk thistle with this hepatitis C medication might
increase levels of the drug in your blood plasma. Avoid using milk thistle and
simeprevir together.
Sirolimus (Rapamune). Taking milk thistle with this immunosuppressant
might change the way your body processes the medication.
1. Milk thistle. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.
https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/milk-thistle. Accessed Oct. 30, 2020.
2. Milk thistle. IBM Micromedex. https://www.micromedexsolutions.com. Accessed Oct. 30, 2020.
3. Milk thistle. Facts & Comparisons eAnswers. https://www.wolterskluwercdi.com/facts-
comparisons-online/. Accessed Oct. 30, 2020.
4. Milk thistle. Natural Medicines. https://naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com. Accessed Oct.
30, 2020.
5. Pizzorono JE, et al., eds. Silybum marianum (milk thistle). In: Textbook of Natural Medicine. 5th
ed. Elsevier; 2021. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Oct. 30, 2020.
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Notice of Nondiscrimination
Digital Accessibility Statement
Advertising & Sponsorship Policy
Site Map
© 1998-2026 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER).
All rights reserved.

[page 4]
ART-20362885