

[page 1]
Donate now 
Menu 
Home  Cancer News  Latest News  Miracle cancer cures? Ask for evidence
Cancer News 
The latest news, analysis and opinion from Cancer Research UK
Search News
Categories

[page 2]
There's no scientific evidence to show that lemons can cure cancer, despite what the internet might tell
you.
Health & Medicine
Miracle cancer cures? Ask for evidence
by Kat Arney | Analysis
13 September 2013
23 comments
15 mins read

[page 3]
There’s no scientific
evidence to show that
lemon juice can cure
cancer, despite what the
internet might tell you.
Share this article
This post is 12 years old, so some information may be outdated
The UK charity Sense About Science will on Monday issue
a new edition of their excellent booklet “I’ve got nothing to
lose by trying it” as part of the Ask For Evidence campaign,
which aims to empower patients and their families to ask
for the scientific evidence behind claims made for
treatments and products. We wrote this short piece for
their website, looking at some of the “miracle cures” for
cancer we’ve encountered. Sense About Science has
gathered these stories together and will be sharing them
on their website over the course of next week.
At Cancer Research UK, we’re often asked about
alternative cancer cures. These are usually circulated on
the internet and end up plastered onto our Facebook
page (often accompanied by the phrase “they don’t want
you to know about it). Just a small selection of the cures
we’ve heard about recently includes lemon juice, baking soda, apricot kernels, coffee
enemas, tropical fruit, “alkaline” foods (whatever they are…), even bleach. But while
there are plenty of ‘miracle cures’ out there, a little investigation shows that there’s
very little evidence that any of them actually work.
In some cases – particularly chemicals found in plants and other foodstuffs – there
may be lab studies suggesting it has an anti-cancer effect. But many things can kill
cancer cells growing in a Petri dish in the lab, and chemicals that seem promising in
the lab or even in animal models of tumours can be disappointingly ineffective when
faced with the real deal in a cancer patient.
Yet the internet is bursting with anecdotes from patients who have apparently been
“cured” by all kinds of pills, lotions and potions. So what should we make of them?
Despite what people may claim, videos and stories are not scientific evidence for the
effectiveness of any cancer treatment. When faced with a patient story, it’s
impossible to tell whether these patients have been ‘cured’ by a particular treatment
or not. We know nothing about their medical diagnosis (did they actually have
cancer? If so, what type and how was it confirmed?), the stage and aggressiveness of
the disease or their outlook.

[page 4]
Often it turns out that people have had conventional cancer treatments too, yet this
may not be mentioned. We don’t know about the chemical composition of the
treatment they got – for example, one alternative prostate cancer treatment was
found to contain prescription drugs. And we only hear about the success stories –
what about the people who have tried alternative therapies and not been cured?
People who make bold claims only pick their best cases without presenting the full
picture.
This highlights the importance of publishing data from rigorous lab research and
well-designed clinical trials in peer-reviewed scientific and medical journals.
Conducting proper clinical studies enables researchers to compare like with like, and
prove that a prospective cancer treatment is safe and effective. And publishing their
data in scientific journals allows doctors around the world to judge for themselves
and use the information for the benefit of their patients.
This is the standard to which all conventional cancer treatments are held, and it’s one
that alternative treatments should be held to too. Anecdotes and videos prove
nothing and benefit no-one – we need reliable, scientific research to judge whether a
treatment is effective.
When faced with a diagnosis of cancer, it’s tempting to turn to “Dr Google” to find out
more, but we urge patients to check out the evidence behind any alternative
treatments they might be thinking of taking and talk it through with a medical
professional. Not only are people at risk of wasting their time and money on
completely ineffective treatments, there is also the possibility that a therapy might be
harmful or interact with conventional treatments.
Through our information services, we’re well aware how distressing this kind of
misinformation about ‘cures’ for serious illnesses can be for people. It gives them false
hope and can lower their confidence in the treatment they are receiving from their
own doctors.
Cancer Research UK’s website provides a wealth of information on a range of
alternative and complementary therapies, which is all supported behind-the-scenes
by solid scientific research. We’ve also written here on the blog about conspiracy
theories, alternative treatments and more.
Elsewhere, the American Cancer Society also has an impressive collection of
evidence on alternative treatments, and the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Centre
maintains a searchable database on herbs and supplements. Finally, Quackwatch
has a list of some of the more unusual ‘miracle cures’ and a special message for
patients seeking alternative treatments.
If you want to talk to someone about any cancer treatment, call the Cancer Research
UK Information Nurses on freephone 0808 800 4040, 9am-5pm Monday-Friday.

[page 5]
Kat
Image by Elf, taken from Wikimedia Commons
Highlighted content
Is there a link between faster ageing and early-onset cancer risk?
SABR radiotherapy slashes the time needed to treat some early-stage
prostate cancers
Could the microbiome help us stop cancer before it starts? 
New data shows the HPV vaccine is saving lives from cervical cancer
The cell keeps the score: 'memory', inflammation and bowel cancer
Precision prevention: how to take the next step in preventing cancer
New study looks for better ways to prevent skin cancer in the people most
at risk

[page 6]
More like this
Cancer waiting times: Latest updates and analysis
SABR radiotherapy slashes the time needed to treat some early-stage
prostate cancers
Breakthrough international trial launches to tackle young people’s
cancers
Related topics
Treatment
Research and trials
Alternative therapies
Cancer in the news
Sign up to our newsletter
Subscribe now
Comments
Tdwimo Skocker
8 March 2014
To all BIG MOUTH who shout there is no cancer conspiracy, get out of your
ignorance

[page 7]
and search for: 1) Bill Henderson web page 2) Story of William D. Kelley, DDS 3) The
Cancer Conspiracy 4) Chemotherapy Genocide 5) The Cancer Industry – Ralph
Moss, PhD 6) Story of Dr Royal Raymond Rife 7) Story of Dr Max Gerson 8)
Supression and Persecutions of Natural Cancer Cures. 9) The Cancer Mafia, etc.
10) ESSIAC CURES.
Roberto Pablo Acevedo
24 February 2014
@Francisco Silveira – That is fantastic that you have found a cure for cancer! I
would love to see double blind studies of your formula in a peer-reviewed journal.
You should be nominated for the Nobel Prize for medicine.
Tongue firmly planted in cheek, in case you didn’t catch on.
Francisco Silveira
3 February 2014
My name is Francisco Silveira. I’m 82 and by the way you judge people who cure
themselves with natural products, I’m a Quack.
My medical records show that I have cured my skin cancers and about one-year-
ago, my homemade medicine also cured multiple tumors in my liver, spleen and
a bleeding one in my bladder. What you have to treat any cancer will be
considered by the coming generations; the Dark-Ages of Medicine. Before calling
other people quacks, look at yourselves. Look at your survival rates.
Bill
29 January 2014
Some people here need to study science more as it is a proven fact by science
that
there are what many would call alternative medicine that actually work! I have
researched and read over 1.5 million pages of research from around the world
and have found many cures for disease. Most people do not know that Some
Doctors in the U.S. wrote books an Curing disease in the late 1800s -early 1900s. In
their books they
wrote about how they cured all types of cancers and other disease. CURED
DISEASE!
NOT MASK IT WITH A DRUG!
Best wishes to those looking for the truth and a cure to disease.
Stephen
28 January 2014

[page 8]
Well, there are doctors who have had great success by using natural treatments.
Most cancer patients die from the poison of chemotherapy, not the cancer. Based
on my research, cancer is easily curable and the people who own big pharma are
only interested in money. I believe the medical profession is the biggest cause of
death in the Western world, not because doctors are bad people, but because the
system is controlled. I no longer fear cancer because I know how easy it is to cure.
The sleeping giant is rising. Soon the truth will become widespread, and the
people who own the system can expect a very long time behind bars.
Rehan
30 November 2013
Another question, do home remedies counts for cancer?
/www.enaturalhealthcures.com/cancer-therapy.html
Rehan
30 November 2013
Do any authentic alternate cancer treatment available till date?
Lindi
29 November 2013
Oh Please not another alt pusher trying to sell a book of the backs of desperate
and vulnerable cancer patients, you people really have no shame do you, you
didnt cure your breast cancer by a EMEM frequency generator , or by useing
natural therapies to “Boost” your immune system, and your breast cancer
certainly WASNT caused by a root canal tooth, do you know anything about the
biology of cancer????? i suggest doing some proper research into the history of
cancer and the biology of this disease (Its free from reptuable cancer
organisations BTW no books to sell) 1- there is no “cure” for breast cancer there
are treatments that will hopefully keep your cancer at bay , breast cancer can
come back at anytime 5/10/20 yrs later the same cancer on path report ,the ONLY
time you will know if you are cured of breast cancer is when you grow old and die
of something else!!, furthermore you can “Boost ” the immune system as much as
you like it wont stop or cure a cancer , The Immune system DOES NOT reconise
cancer cells, cancer cells are your own body cells multiplying out of control the
immune system only reconises bacteria and viruses for goodness sake why the
heck do you think scientists are trying to develope vacines to TRAIN the Immune
system to reconise cancer cells jeeeessseee , please stop being so gullable
people lots of people out there makeing a very good liveing out of all this twaddle

[page 9]
and nonsence , some of you people really need to wise up and get yourselves
EDUCATED. , What utter Piffle!!!!!!!!
celia
10 November 2013
When enough people in the world realise cancer has become big business. We
will find a cure.
Celia
celia
9 November 2013
Yes Rex your right drugs companies want to make shed loads of money from this
terrible illness. But you should research the latest treatment for prostate cancer. It
involves turmeric .. And it’s being used by the medical profession so don’t give up
believing that cures will be found in the garden or cupboard .
Celia
Rex Springfield
9 November 2013
How can natural treatment or Natural FOODS damage our body??? Eat any kind of
fruits and you’ll even live longer and healthy everyday. I’ve contributed lots of
money for Cancer Research UK in the past just to realize that they’ve never able to
produce a cure for cancer which you can supposedly get from your garden for
FREE. Of course they don’t want you to know as they can’t make money from it.
They want you to get a conventional treatment of Chemo, radio, surgery and pay
big sums just to die few years later.
Frank Knight.
30 October 2013
My last ever word on this as I know i won’t get far.
Frank Knight.
30 October 2013
I should have started with The cancer industry (drug companies).
Frank Knight.
30 October 2013

[page 10]
Well you may not want a CURE when TREATMENT is far more profitable.as for
quacks how barbaric is it to burn people? Bring on the leaches. Quoting the
American Cancer Society I found funny.
Mark
16 October 2013
Take your time to look at life for what it really is around you if you wish to seek a
breakthrough.
Lemon juice could never be considered a cure.
It is acidic and full of sugar, exactly what a cancer cell needs to thrive.
Stop looking to killing cancer and start looking to helping it grow, paradoxically,
look to preventing normal cells from growth without cancer causing “ingredients”
and killing them slowly, and look away from helping them live.
Your blinding yourselves by mechanisms. While it is right to look to these
mechanisms, you have to look to cancer for what it really is. Why and how
philosophically. In the same way is it right for us to call every person “different”
from us, when we are abiding by the same mechanisms in a different way?, You
may be ecstatic over a new car and show this yourself in your speech, body
language and thoughts, while I may become “my version” of ecstatic through a
different means of the same mechanisms. Which is why there are numerous
amounts of different cancers. Only curing one would only singularly cure that one
and while that may be beneficial to treating others with the secrets of it’s
mechanism. It will never be obtained if you chase two rabbits for 10 days with 20
different tools. You will always go hungry.
Have patience, look to the trees, the grass and most importantly yourself.
Look to life and death and you will find your cure.
Can’t you see that initially, cancer wants to die?,
Lindi
3 October 2013
Fortunately having myself lived with an aggressive type of breast cancer for over
6 yrs i’m still alive and kicking thanks to cancer research and conventional cancer
treatments that have been proven to work, i also know many people up and down
the UK with secondary breast cancer, and many are still alive some 12 or more yrs
later , its a nonsense that anyone who has an aggressive cancer only lasts a few
months after treatment, getting the right treatments for each individuals cancer
and finding the ones which work for them can keep even secondary cancer at
bay for many yrs, Conventional medicine doesn’t dismiss “Natural” Medicine
when it has been Proven to work, i.e Aspirin comes from the bark of a willow tree,
Taxotere a type of chemo comes from the Yew Tree, these are just small 2
examples, however,so called “Alternative” cancer treatments touted on the
internet with nothing more to offer than Anecdotes in You-Tube videos and on

[page 11]
dubious alternative cancer curing treatment websites DO NOT work, they have no
clinical scientific evidence to back them up , they have not been tested in robust
clinical trials to prove either efficiency or safety and they offer no more than False
Hope to a Cancer Patient which is utterly cruel , when someone has been told
they have no more treatment options left, it is cruel for these snake oil salesmen
to prey on those vulnerable cancer patients, it robs them of their time, which
would be better spent with their families , Its robs them of their savings and in
some cases their homes, There really is No such thing as Alternative Medicine,
There are treatments that Work and there are treatments that Don’t, When a
Treatment has been Proven to work, it is called MEDICINE, therefore is No Longer
Alternative.
celia
2 October 2013
Well said Nicholas.
I don’t know of anyone who has survived aggressive cancer. Some have gained a
few months after having chemo, but the treatment made them so ill.
A thought on natural medicine. The treatment for gout stems from the Egyptians
and dates back five thousand years.
A great many herbs spices and berries used by people in the past have found
their way into modern medicine!
Nicholas Hall
1 October 2013
When you are told that you have three months to live, and conventional
treatment, may extend your life by a month or so,if you are prepared to spend
your time being sick from the chemo, and there is NO hope of it curing you. Then
who the hell are any of you to criticise anyone trying something different. Mind
over matter is a very strong healer and if you believe in the herbal go for it. I have
seen too many people go down the conventional treatment, with exactly the
same results, death, normally to the month predicted. I also know people who
have refused conventional treatment and are still alive years later, and that is ad
fact! Do NOT try to force people to conform to conventional medicine if they
decide not to ,it is their choice not yours. As such why put up such a case to go
down the conventional medical line? Afraid that some of this has a positive result
as opposed to chemo that will poison your body.
Penny
27 September 2013
Quackery flourishes when conventional treatments are unpleasant and only
partially effective.

[page 12]
Before the advent of antibiotics there were “alternative” treatments for diseases
such syphilis and TB. Effective modern treatments for these formerly serious
diseases have driven the VD and TB quacks away.
Sadly, even with modern treatment cancers can not always be cured (although
some cancers are cured and others can be kept at bay for years), so there are
frightened and desperate people out there for cancer quacks to exploit. It is good
that cancer charities are mobilising information to fight exploitation of the
vulnerable.
Lindi
13 September 2013
Alternative Therapies make more money in a year than Cancer Research does , I
find that staggering!! ,especially when alternative therapies don’t have a hope in
hell of working let alone curing anything. It’s quite shocking really just how many
cancer patients believe in all this ALT rubbish, which sadly seems particularly
abundant online, of course Alt is often aimed at the vulnerable, frightened and
often desperate cancer patients ,so its very big business, I find it quite disgraceful
having known quite a few friends with cancer turn to alternative therapies
because they have been brainwashed with all this silly nonsense online, I think
much more needs to be done to make people much more aware of all the Hukum
out there sadly surrounding this disease ,and that those websites that continue to
promote this kind of nonsense to cancer patient’s are brought to task.
Thanks CRUK, for publishing this very good artical. .
Daveollie
13 September 2013
Celia, these cancer treatments that damage peoples bodies, have gotton rid of
hodgkins lymphoma for me and saved my life, to my family, the drug companies
deserve to make a lot of money because they are heroes to millions of survivors.
Remember they will only make their millions if they are selling something that can
work, maybe not for everybody, but it certainly has for me x x
Ruth
13 September 2013
I guess CRUK and Kat Arney feel they have to appeal to the lowest common
denominator, but it still depressing how this blog always assumes people are
stupid, and cannot distinguish between peer reviewed scientific articles which are
available on the internet, and rubbish.

[page 13]
celia
13 September 2013
Cancer treatments make massive amounts of money for the drugs companies,
These drugs damage peoples bodies and don’t always cure them. We need to be
told what is causing cancer so we can help ourselves to stay healthy.
And we need cures not treatments.
Speak to a nurse
Nurse Helpline
0808 800 4040
Questions about cancer? Call freephone
9 to 5 Monday to Friday or email us
Quick Links
Find local shops
Shop online
Contact us
Jobs
Follow us
 
 
 
 
About our information
Terms and conditions
Privacy
Modern Slavery Statement
Cookies
Accessibility
Sitemap

[page 14]
Cancer Research UK is a registered charity in England and Wales (1089464), Scotland (SC041666), the Isle of
Man (1103) and Jersey (247). A company limited by guarantee. Registered company in England and Wales
(4325234) and the Isle of Man (5713F). Registered address: 2 Redman Place, London, E20 1JQ.