

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Mother’s milk for low-
birth-weight infants
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Every year, more than 20 million infants are born weighing less than 2.5 kg – over 96%
of them in developing countries. These low-birth-weight (LBW) infants are at increased
risk of early growth retardation, infectious disease, developmental delay and death
during infancy and childhood.
Most LBW is a consequence of preterm birth, small size for gestational age, or both.
Interventions to improve the feeding of LBW infants are likely to improve the immediate
and longer-term health and well-being of the individual infant and have a significant
impact on neonatal and infant mortality levels in the population.

[page 2]
Breastfeeding is best for infants, however LBW infants are frequently unable to
breastfeed for a number of reasons. LBW infants fed by alternative methods, such as
cup, spoon or intragastric tube, can still benefit from their mother’s own milk. Current
evidence indicates that feeding mother’s own milk to LBW infants is associated with
lower mortality, lower incidence of severe infections and necrotizing enterocolitis, and
improved mental development scores, compared with feeding infant formula.
WHO Recommendations
LBW infants, including those with very low birth weight, should be fed mother’s own
milk.
This recommendation does not address sick LBW infants or infants with birth
weight less than 1.0 kg.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidelines on optimal feeding of low birth-weight infants in low- and
middle-income countries
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Optimal feeding of low-birth-weight infants: technical review
Edmond K, Bahl R. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006.
Related Cochrane reviews

[page 3]
Formula milk versus maternal breast milk for feeding preterm or low birth weight infants
Henderson G, Anthony MY, McGuire W.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2007, Issue 4. Art. No.:
CD002972.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Costs of necrotizing enterocolitis and cost-effectiveness of exclusively human milk-based
products in feeding extremely premature infants
Ganapathy V, Hay JW, Kim JH. Breastfeed Med. 2012; 7(1):29-37.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters

[page 4]
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO