

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Multiple micronutrient
powders for point-of-
use fortification of
foods consumed by
pregnant women
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Micronutrients are only needed in very small quantities but are essential for normal
physiological function, growth and development. Deficiencies of micronutrients such as
vitamin A, iron, iodine and folate are particularly common among during pregnancy,
due to increased nutrient requirements of the mother and developing fetus. These
deficiencies can negatively impact the health of the mother, her pregnancy, as well as
the health of the newborn baby.

[page 2]
Point-of-use fortification with multiple micronutrient powders refers to the addition of
powders containing vitamins and minerals to energy-containing foods at home or in
any other place where meals are to be consumed, such as schools, nurseries and
refugee camps
WHO Recommendations
Routine use of multiple micronutrient powders during pregnancy is not recommended
as an alternative to standard iron and folic supplementation during pregnancy for
improving maternal and infant health outcomes.
This recommendation is based on the very limited evidence to directly assess the
potential benefits or harms of the use of point-of-use fortification with multiple
micronutrient powders in pregnant women for improving maternal and infant health
outcomes.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: use of multiple micronutrient powders for point-of-use
fortification of foods consumed by pregnant women
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Multiple micronutrient powders for home (point-of-use) fortification of foods in pregnant
women
Suchdev PS, Peña-Rosas JP, De-Regil LM. Multiple micronutrient powders for home (point-of-use)
fortification of foods in pregnant women.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 6. Art. No.:
CD011158.
Summary of this review

[page 3]
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO