

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Multiple micronutrient
powders for point-of-
use fortification of
foods consumed by
children 6–23 months
of age
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Infants and children are the groups that are most vulnerable to micronutrient
deficiency, given the high vitamin and mineral intake they need to support their rapid
growth and adequate development. Vitamin and mineral deficiencies, particularly of
vitamin A, iron and zinc contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality in children
under 5 years of age.

[page 2]
Interventions to prevent and/or treat micronutrient deficiencies exist, including
promotion of breastfeeding, fortification of staple and complementary foods, and
provision of supplements. However, implementation bottlenecks and barriers (including
lack of adherence to dosing regimens, low acceptability, poor distribution channels, lack
of availability of skilled health workers) may reduce the effectiveness and impact of
these, and other interventions to address micronutrient deficiencies.
Multiple micronutrient powders have been developed as alternative way of providing
micronutrients to populations where other interventions are difficult to implement.
Multiple micronutrient powders are single-dose packets of vitamins and minerals in
powder form that can be sprinkled onto any ready to eat semi-solid food consumed at
home, school or any other point of use. The powders are used to increase the
micronutrient content of a child's diet without changing their usual dietary habits.
Multiple micronutrient powders have been shown to reduce the risk of iron deficiency
and anaemia in infants and young children, 6–23 months of age.
WHO Recommendations
In populations where the prevalence of anaemia in children under 2 years of age or
under 5 years of age is 20% or higher, point-of-use fortification of complementary
foods* with iron-containing micronutrient powders in infants and young children aged
6–23 months is recommended, to improve iron status and reduce anaemia.
*According to the WHO publication, Complementary feeding: report of the global
consultation, appropriate complementary feeding should start from the age of 6
months, with continued breast feeding up to 2 years or beyond. Further guidance on
complementary feeding may assist the implementation of this guideline, including the
WHO/PAHO publication, Guiding principles for complementary feeding of the breastfed
child and the WHO publication, Guiding principles for feeding non-breastfed children 6–24
months of age.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO guideline: use of multiple micronutrient powders for point-of-use
fortification of foods consumed by infants and young children aged 6–
23 months and children aged 2–12 years ﻿
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Guiding principles for feeding non-breastfed children 6-24 months of
age
Guiding principles for complementary feeding of the breastfed child
Complementary feeding : report of the global consultation, and
summary of guiding principles for complementary feeding of the
breastfed child
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Home fortification of foods with multiple micronutrient powders for health and nutrition in
children under 2 years of age
De-Regil LM, Suchdev PS, Vist GE, Walleser S, Peña-Rosas JP. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2011; Issue 9. Art. No.: CD008959. (Update has been submitted for publication)
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews
Effectiveness of Micronutrient Powders (MNP) in women and children

[page 4]
Salam RA, MacPhail C, Das JK, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2013;13 Suppl.3:S22.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Cost-benefit analysis of a micronutrient supplementation and early childhood stimulation
program in Nicaragua
Lopez Boo F, Palloni G, Urzua S. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014; 1308:139-48.
Economic gains of a home fortification program: evaluation of \"Sprinkles\" from the
provider's perspective
Sharieff W, Horton SE, Zlotkin S. Can J Public Health. 2006; 97(1):20-3.
Economics of preventing premature mortality and impaired cognitive development in
children through home-fortification: a health policy perspective
Sharieff W, Zlotkin SH, Ungar WJ, Feldman B, Krahn MD, Tomlinson G. Int J Technol Assess Health Care.
2008; 24(3):303-11.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is an Essential
Nutrition Action targeting the first 1000
days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions

[page 5]
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO