

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Multiple micronutrient
powders for point-of-
use fortification of
foods consumed by
children 2–12 years of
age
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Infants and children are the groups that are most vulnerable to micronutrient
deficiency, given the high vitamin and mineral intake they need to support their rapid
growth and adequate development. Vitamin and mineral deficiencies, particularly of
vitamin A, iron and zinc contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality in children
under 5 years of age.

[page 2]
Interventions to prevent and/or treat micronutrient deficiencies exist, including
promotion of breastfeeding, fortification of staple and complementary foods, and
provision of supplements. However, implementation bottlenecks and barriers (including
lack of adherence to dosing regimens, low acceptability, poor distribution channels, lack
of availability of skilled health workers) may reduce the effectiveness and impact of
these, and other interventions to address micronutrient deficiencies.
Multiple micronutrient powders have been developed as alternative way of providing
micronutrients to populations where other interventions are difficult to implement.
Multiple micronutrient powders are single-dose packets of vitamins and minerals in
powder form that can be sprinkled onto any ready to eat semi-solid food consumed at
home, school or any other point of use. The powders are used to increase the
micronutrient content of a child's diet without changing their usual dietary habits.
Multiple micronutrient powders have been shown to reduce the risk of iron deficiency
and anaemia in children aged 2–12 years of age.
WHO Recommendations
In populations where the prevalence of anaemia in school-age children is 20% or higher,
point-of-use fortification of foods with iron-containing micronutrient powders in
children aged 2–12 years is recommended, to improve iron status and reduce anaemia.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO guideline: use of multiple micronutrient powders for point-of-use
fortification of foods consumed by infants and young children aged 6–
23 months and children aged 2–12 years ﻿
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines

[page 3]
Point-of-use fortification of foods with micronutrient powders containing iron in children of
preschool and school age
De-Regil LM, Jefferds MED, Peña-Rosas JP. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2017; Issue 11. Art.
No.: CD009666.
Related systematic reviews
Effectiveness of Micronutrient Powders (MNP) in women and children
Salam RA, MacPhail C, Das JK, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2013;13 Suppl.3:S22.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Cost-benefit analysis of a micronutrient supplementation and early childhood stimulation
program in Nicaragua
Lopez Boo F, Palloni G, Urzua S. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014; 1308:139-48.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 4]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO