

[page 1]
Diet myths have come and gone, but some manage to stand the test of time. For example, the
idea behind “negative calorie foods.” This claim suggests that celery, lettuce or other fruits and
vegetables take more energy to chew and digest than they actually contain and is based on
wishful thinking — not research. Although many vegetables and fruits are low in calories and a
good source of dietary fiber, they aren’t actually a “negative calorie” food.
How Metabolism Works
Our bodies burn a certain amount of calories at rest. This resting metabolic rate, or RMR, takes
into account height, weight and age, as well as the energy needed for normal bodily functions
such as breathing and pumping blood.
Diet Trends
"Negative-Calorie Foods" Still Count
Reviewers: Academy Staff RDNs
Published: July 22, 2019
Reviewed: April 29, 2025
YelenaYemchuk/iStock/Thinkstock

[page 2]
The next factor to consider with metabolism (and the one negative-calorie proponents will tout)
is the thermic effect of food, or the amount of energy used to chew, digest and store nutrients.
Approximately 10% of the calories we burn each day are used for this purpose. And, despite a
minor rise in energy expenditure for a few hours after eating food — even with low-calorie
foods — don't expect this to result in extra weight loss.
Physical activity, whether it’s from activities of daily living or fitness activities, must be taken
into account when calculating total calories burned in a day.
A quick search on the internet leads to lists of "negative-calorie foods" and “calorie-burning”
diets. Celery often tops lists, followed by lettuce, cucumbers and a few citrus fruits. These foods
share similar nutrition profiles: They’re low in calories and have water contents greater than
90% by weight. These low-calorie, plant-based foods are great additions to a balanced eating
plan but they lack adequate protein and fat to be the only source of nutrition.
Establish a Flexible Approach to Eating
Shifting the focus away from individual foods and concentrating efforts on establishing a
healthy eating pattern is a more sustainable and flexible approach to eating that includes a
variety of foods. With more than 80% of U.S. adults having a body mass index (BMI) categorized
as overweight or obese, there is both an interest in and need for clarity when it comes to safe,
healthy and sustainable weight-loss approaches. An eating pattern that includes a variety of
foods can help lead to healthy eating habits that will last a lifetime.
Before beginning a weight-loss program, consult with a registered dietitian nutritionist who will
work with you to create a realistic and healthful eating plan based on your medical history,
lifestyle and preferences.
Find a Nutrition Expert
Looking for credible nutrition information and recommendations? The Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics' network of credentialed food and nutrition practitioners are
ready to help!
See Directory