

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Nutritional care of
children and adults
with Ebola virus
disease in treatment
centres
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Ebola virus disease (EVD), formerly known as Ebola haemorrhagic fever, is an acute
infection caused by the Ebola virus. EVD starts with a flu-like syndrome, fever and
profound weakness which may initially appear 2 to 21 days after exposure to the virus.
Symptoms of EVD, including a lack of appetite, sore throat, and difficulty in swallowing
and breathing, have a direct or indirect impact on nutrition. Vomiting, along with

[page 2]
diarrhoea, causes additional nutritional stress through rapid loss of electrolytes,
protein, other essential nutrients and fluid.
EVD patients may have varied nutritional priorities, depending on the stage of the
illness and the individual patient’s underlying nutritional status. It is unclear whether
preceding nutritional status contributes directly to the outcome of the disease.
Currently, it is unknown whether nutritional support contributes to patients’ survival.
The Ebola virus is present in breast milk and cases of infants of breastfeeding mothers
contracting EVD have been noted. However, the transmission mechanism (whether via
pregnancy and delivery, breast milk or the close contact with the mother with Ebola,
which might include contact with other body fluids) is not clear.
The 2014 WHO interim guideline lays out some basic principles of optimal nutritional
care for adults and paediatric patients during treatment and convalescence in Ebola
treatment units, community care centres or other centres where Ebola patients are
receiving care and support. Further guidance on breastfeeding can be found in the
2016 pocket guide.
WHO Recommendations
Breastfeeding
Breastfeeding should be stopped if acute EVD is suspected or confirmed in lactating
women or in a breastfeeding child. The child should be separated from the
breastfeeding woman and provided a breastmilk substitute as needed.
Children without confirmed Ebola virus (EBOV) infection who are exposed to breastmilk
of women with confirmed EVD should be considered contacts. The child should stop
breastfeeding, be given a breastmilk substitute as needed, and undergo close
monitoring for signs and symptoms of EVD for 21 days. Post-exposure prophylaxis for
EVD can be considered for children exposed to breastmilk of women infected with EBOV
on a case-by-case basis and in accordance with existing research protocols.
If a breastfeeding woman and her child are both diagnosed with EVD, breastfeeding
should be discontinued, the pair should be separated, and appropriate breastmilk
substitutes provided. However, if the child is under six months of age and no safe and
appropriate breastmilk substitutes are available, or the child cannot be adequately
cared for, then the option to not separate and continue breastfeeding may be
considered.
A woman who has recovered from EVD, cleared viremia and wants to continue
breastfeeding should wait until after two consecutive negative EBOV breastmilk tests by
RT-PCR, separated by 24 hours. During this time, the child should be given a breastmilk
substitute.

[page 3]
Provision of food
Until further evidence is available, patients should be provided with a minimum of the
recommended daily allowance for each nutrient.
During convalescence, patients should be encouraged to eat as much as they can.
General management, diet and feeding of children and adults with Ebola virus
disease
Patients should be provided with food if they are conscious and can swallow.
The nutritional needs and approach to nutritional care in any individual will be
determined by the patient’s preceding nutritional status, severity of illness and age.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidelines for the management of pregnant and breastfeeding women
in the context of Ebola virus disease
Clinical management of patients with viral haemorrhagic fever: A
pocket guide for front-line health workers
Interim guideline: nutritional care of children and adults with Ebola
virus disease in treatment centres: key recommendations
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 4]
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
Communicable diseases and severe food shortage
Infant feeding in the context of Ebola: updated guidance (external link)
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Additional supporting reviews
(for Guideline: Updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and children)
The effectiveness of interventions to treat severe acute malnutrition in young children: a
systematic review
Picot J, Hartwell D , Harris P, Mendes D, Clegg AJ, and Takeda A. Health Technology Assessment. 2012;
Vol.16:No.19(for Guideline: Updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and
children).

[page 5]
WHO interim guidelines/guidance are
developed during health emergencies,
based on currently available evidence;
however, it may not go through the
GRC process, given the urgency with
which the guidance is needed
Learn More 
Category 2 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO