

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Nutritional care of HIV-
infected children
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Weight loss and undernutrition are common in people living with HIV/AIDS and are
likely to accelerate disease progression, increase morbidity and reduce survival. In
children with HIV/AIDS, growth impairment often occurs before opportunistic infections
or other symptoms are present.
Adequate nutrition, which is best achieved through consumption of a balanced healthy
diet, is vital for health and survival for all individuals regardless of HIV status. Children
deserve special attention because of nutritional requirements necessary for growth and
development, and because of their dependency on adults for adequate care.

[page 2]
Nutritional assessment and support should be integrated into the routine care of HIV-
infected children. Dietary interventions should consider issues of food security, food
quantity and food quality, as well as absorption and digestion of nutrients.
WHO Recommendations
Children (6 months-14 years) living with HIV should be assessed, classified and
managed according to a nutrition care plan to cover their nutrient needs associated
with the presence of HIV and nutritional status and to ensure appropriate growth and
development.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidelines for an integrated approach to nutritional care of HIV-
infected children (6 month-14 years)
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Nutritional interventions for reducing morbidity and mortality in people with HIV
Grobler L, Siegfried N, Visser ME, Mahlungulu SSN, Volmink J. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2013; Issue 2. Art. No.: CD004536.
Summary of this review 
Podcast (Cochrane)
Micronutrient supplementation for children with HIV infection

[page 3]
Irlam JH, Siegfried N, Visser ME, Rollins NC.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 10. Art.
No.: CD010666.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is an Essential
Nutrition Action targeting the first 1000
days of life.
Learn More 
Nutritional care for HIV-infected
children
Category 2 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Regions

Policies


[page 4]
About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO