

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Nutrition counselling
for adolescents and
adults with HIV/AIDS
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Weight loss and undernutrition are common in people living with HIV/AIDS and are
likely to accelerate disease progression, increase morbidity and reduce survival.
Nutritional counselling, care and support is important from the early stages of the
infection to prevent the development of nutritional deficiencies. Nutrition counselling
may improve health outcomes in adolescents and adults with HIV by reducing the
incidence of HIV-associated complications and delaying the progression of HIV
infection, thereby improving quality of life and ultimately reducing disease-related
mortality.

[page 2]
Adequate nutrition, which is best achieved through consumption of a balanced healthy
diet, is vital for health and survival for all individuals regardless of HIV status.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Nutrient requirements for people living with HIV/AIDS: report of a
technical consultation, 13-15 May 2003, Geneva
Consultative meeting on nutrition interventions for improving the
prevention, care and management of HIV/AIDS
Living well with HIV/AIDS
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews

[page 3]
Nutritional interventions for reducing morbidity and mortality in people with HIV
Grobler L, Siegfried N, Visser ME, Mahlungulu SSN, Volmink J. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2013; Issue 2. Art. No.: CD004536.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 2 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 4]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO