

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Nutrition assessment
and counselling in
individuals with active
tuberculosis
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In 2012 there were an estimated 8.6 million new cases of tuberculosis (TB) globally. TB
morbidity and mortality are highest in developing countries.
Undernutrition increases the risk of tuberculosis and vice-versa and, as a result,
undernutrition is highly prevalent among people with tuberculosis. It has been
demonstrated that undernutrition is a risk factor for progression from tuberculosis
infection to active tuberculosis disease and that undernutrition at the time of diagnosis
of active tuberculosis is a predictor of increased risk of death and tuberculosis relapse.

[page 2]
However, the evidence concerning the effect of nutritional supplementation on
tuberculosis prevention and health outcomes among people with tuberculosis had not
previously been systematically reviewed.
Nutrition assessment and counselling are critical components of managing
undernutrition in individuals with active tuberculosis.
WHO Recommendations
All individuals with active TB should receive: i) an assessment of their nutritional status,
and ii) appropriate counselling based on their nutritional status at diagnosis and
throughout treatment.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidance for national tuberculosis programmes on the management of
tuberculosis in children, 2nd ed
Nutritional care and support for patients with tuberculosis
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Nutritional supplements for people being treated for active tuberculosis

[page 3]
Sinclair D, Abba K, Grobler L, Sudarsanam TD. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011; Issue 11.
Art. No.: CD006086.
Related Cochrane reviews
Nutritional supplements for people being treated for active tuberculosis.
Grobler L, Nagpal S, Sudarsanam TD, Sinclair D.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 6.
Art. No.: CD006086.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters

[page 4]
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO