

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Periconceptional folic
acid supplementation
to prevent neural tube
defects
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
The nutritional status of women prior to and during pregnancy plays a key role in fetal
growth and development. Poor nutritional status in a woman in the period before she
conceives and in early pregnancy (up to 12 weeks gestation),may increase the risk for
adverse pregnancy outcomes. This periconceptional period is therefore considered to
be an important time for interventions that promote maternal health and thereby
increase the likelihood of positive pregnancy outcomes.

[page 2]
Birth defects, or congenital malformations, are structural or functional abnormalities
present from birth and can be caused by a number of factors, including micronutrient
deficiencies. Neural tube defects such as spina bifida are one of the most common
congenital malformations.
Current evidence suggests that folic acid supplementation in the periconceptional
period, either alone or in combination with other vitamins and minerals, can prevent
neural tube defects.
receive information on the risk of recurrence;
be advised on the protective effect of periconceptional folic acid supplementation;
be offered high-dose supplementation (5 mg folic acid daily); and
be advised to increase their food intake of folate.
WHO Recommendations
All women, from the moment they begin trying to conceive until 12 weeks of gestation,
should take a folic acid supplement (400 μg folic acid daily).
Women who have had a fetus diagnosed as affected by a neural tube defect or have
given birth to a baby with a neural tube defect should:
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Standards for maternal and neonatal care
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews

[page 3]
Vitamin supplementation for preventing miscarriage
Balogun OO, da Silva Lopes K, Ota E, Takemoto Y, Rumbold A, Takegata M, Mori R. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 5. Art. No.: CD004073.
Summary of this review 
Effects and safety of periconceptional oral folate supplementation for preventing birth defects
De-Regil LM, Peña-Rosas JP, Fernández-Gaxiola AC, Rayco-Solon P.Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 2015, Issue 12. Art. No.: CD007950.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Effect of women's nutrition before and during early pregnancy on maternal and infant
outcomes: a systematic review
Ramakrishnan U, Grant F, Goldenberg T, Zongrone A, Martorell R Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology.
2012; 26 (Suppl. 1):285-301.
The effect of folic acid, protein energy and multiple micronutrient supplements in pregnancy
on stillbirths
Imdad A, Yakoob MY, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2011; 13:11 Suppl 3:S4.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Cost-effectiveness of mandatory folate fortification v. other options for the prevention of
neural tube defects: results from Australia and New Zealand
Dalziel K, Segal L, Katz R. Public Health Nutr. 2010; 13(4):566-78.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Category 2 intervention

[page 4]
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO