

[page 4]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Risk of bias
Two review authors assessed the studies using the RoB 1 tool for selection, performance, detection, attrition, incomplete outcome data,
selective reporting and other bias.
Synthesis methods
Two review authors independently assessed trials for inclusion and risk of bias, extracted data and checked them for accuracy. Two
reviewers assessed the certainty of the evidence using the GRADE approach. We utilized a random-eﬀects model to synthesize the results.
Included studies
Nine trials with 1426 randomized participants met the inclusion criteria. Eight trials included analyzable data for 1276 participants. Overall,
the risk of bias was low for six trials, while three had areas of concern. Because few studies reported on important outcomes, imprecision
was high for those outcomes, limiting the certainty of those analyses.
Synthesis of results
Seven of the included trials compared treatment with placebo and the other two compared progestogen administration with no treatment.
The trials were a mix of multicenter and single-center trials, conducted in Jordan, the UK, the Netherlands, and the USA.
In three trials, participants had three or more consecutive miscarriages and in six trials, participants had two or more consecutive
miscarriages. Route, dosage and duration of progestogen treatment varied across the trials. The majority of trials were at low risk of bias
for most domains. Eight trials with 1276 participants contributed data to the analyses.
Meta-analysis suggests that there is probably little to no diﬀerence in the miscarriage rate for women given progestogen supplementation
compared to placebo or no treatment (risk ratio (RR) 0.91, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.76 to 1.07; I2 = 0%; 8 studies, 1276
participants; moderate-certainty evidence). Subgroup analyses comparing placebo-controlled versus non-placebo-controlled trials, trials
of participants with three or more prior miscarriages compared to women with two or more miscarriages, and diﬀerent routes of
administration showed no clear diﬀerences between subgroups for miscarriage.
For women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology receiving progestogen, there was probably little to no diﬀerence in live birth rate
compared to placebo (RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.96 to 1.12; 5 trials, 1063 participants; moderate-certainty evidence). We are uncertain about the
eﬀect on the rate of preterm birth; there was probably little to no diﬀerence (RR 1.15, 95% CI 0.55 to 2.41; 3 trials, 256 participants; very low-
certainty evidence). No clear diﬀerences were seen for women receiving progestogen for the other important outcomes, including neonatal
death, fetal genital abnormalities, or stillbirth. There was little or no data on other important outcomes of low birth weight, maternal
adverse events, teratogenic eﬀects, or admission to a special care unit.
None of the trials reported on any other important maternal outcomes, including severity of morning sickness, thromboembolic events,
depression, admission to a special care unit, or subsequent fertility.
Authors' conclusions
For women with unexplained recurrent miscarriage, progestogen supplementation therapy probably results in little to no eﬀect on
outcomes in subsequent pregnancies.
Funding
This Cochrane review had no dedicated funding.
Registration
Previous versions of this review were published in the Cochrane Library, available at doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003511.pub5.
P L A I N   L A N G U A G E   S U M M A R Y
Are progestogen medications beneficial for preventing recurrent miscarriage?
Key messages
•
Giving progestogen medication likely makes little to no diﬀerence to the chances of miscarriage or live birth for women who have
previously had miscarriages for no known reason.
What is recurrent miscarriage?
Early pregnancy loss, also known as miscarriage, generally occurs in the first trimester (the first 13 weeks of pregnancy). For some women
and their partners, miscarriages can happen several times. This is also known as having recurrent miscarriage. While there are sometimes
causes found for miscarriages, there are ofen no clear reasons why it happens.
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2

[page 5]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
What are progestogens, and why might they be used?
The hormone called progesterone prepares the womb (uterus) to receive and support the newly fertilized egg during the early part of
pregnancy. It has been suggested that some women who miscarry may not make enough progesterone in the early part of pregnancy.
Supplementation with medications that act like progesterone (called progestogens), which may be natural or synthetic, has been
suggested as a possible way to prevent recurrent miscarriage. Having miscarriages can be both physically and emotionally diﬀicult for
women and their partners. Finding a therapy to help reduce recurrent miscarriage could help them avoid a miscarriage and have a live baby.
What did we want to find out?
We wanted to find out if giving a progestogen in early pregnancy would be better than giving nothing to improve:
•
miscarriage (hoping to reduce this);
•
live birth rate (hoping to increase this);
•
other problems for moms and babies (hoping to reduce these problems, such as low birthweight or needing special care).
What did we do?
We searched for published studies that included women who had experienced recurrent miscarriage and either gave them progestogen
treatment or no treatment (or a 'dummy' pill). We excluded studies of women who had in-vitro fertilization (IVF) fertility treatment.
What did we find?
We found nine studies that enrolled a total of 1426 women with a history of recurrent miscarriage. Eight of the studies contained
information we could use, for a total of 1276 women. These studies found that giving progestogen medication early in pregnancy to women
with recurrent miscarriage probably makes little or no diﬀerence to their chance of miscarriage. We did not find that giving the progestogen
medication by mouth, as a shot (injection), or in the vagina, was likely any better than any of the other ways. The studies also showed that
giving progestogen to women with prior recurrent miscarriage probably made little or no diﬀerence to the chance of having a live baby in
the current pregnancy. We are uncertain about the eﬀect of progestogen on the chances of preterm birth, newborn death, newborn birth
defects, or stillbirth.
What are the limitations of the evidence?
We found evidence was ofen from older studies, many of which were somewhat small. This also meant that some of the details about how
some of the studies were done were not clear. Not all of the studies provided data about all the eﬀects that we were interested in.
How up to date is the evidence?
This updated review searched the evidence on 25 July 2024.
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
3

[page 6]
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
4
S U M M A R Y   O F   F I N D I N G S
 
Summary of findings 1.   Summary of findings table - Progestogen compared to placebo/no treatment for women with recurrent miscarriage of
unclear etiology
Progestogen compared to placebo/no treatment for women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology
Patient or population: women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology
Setting: clinical settings, mainly in Europe, North America, and the UK
Intervention: progestogen
Comparison: placebo/no treatment
Anticipated absolute effects* (95% CI)
Outcomes
Risk with placebo/no
treatment
Risk with progestogen
Relative effect
(95% CI)
№ of participants
(studies)
Certainty of the evi-
dence
(GRADE)
Comments
Miscarriage
310 per 1000
282 per 1000
(235 to 331)
RR 0.91
(0.76 to 1.07)
1276
(8 RCTs)
⊕⊕⊕⊝
Moderatea
 
Live birth rate
660 per 1000
686 per 1000
(634 to 739)
RR 1.04
(0.96 to 1.12)
1063
(5 RCTs)
⊕⊕⊕⊝
Moderatea
 
Preterm birth
75 per 1000
86 per 1000
(41 to 180)
RR 1.15
(0.55 to 2.41)
256
(4 RCTs)
⊕⊝⊝⊝
Very lowa,b
 
*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and
its 95% CI).
CI: confidence interval; RR: risk ratio
GRADE Working Group grades of evidence
High certainty: we are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.
Moderate certainty: we are moderately confident in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is
substantially different.
Low certainty: our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
Very low certainty: we have very little confidence in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect.
See interactive version of this table: https://gdt.gradepro.org/presentations/#/isof/isof_question_revman_web_453523143436048125.
a We downgraded by one level for serious limitations due to some of the studies being at high or unclear risk for selection bias.
b We downgraded by two levels for very serious limitations in imprecision due to small number of events, small sample size and wide CI crossing the line of no eﬀect.
 
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews

[page 7]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
B A C K G R O U N D
Description of the condition
The term miscarriage refers to the loss of a pregnancy prior to the
fetus being viable. This can be defined as reaching 20 or 24 weeks'
gestation depending on the source of the data. Vaginal bleeding
during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy, with or without pain, is
known as threatened miscarriage. This can present with anything
from spots of blood to potentially fatal shock [1]. Once dilation of
the cervix has begun, miscarriage is inevitable [2].
Of all clinically recognized pregnancies, 10% to 15% end in
miscarriage [3], with 1% to 2% of couples suﬀering recurrent
early losses (traditionally defined as three or more spontaneous
miscarriages [4]). It is thought, however, that the true incidence
of early spontaneous miscarriage may be much higher [5, 6, 7].
Miscarriage is an important cause of morbidity and mortality,
especially in low-income countries [8].
It has been estimated that a fetal chromosomal abnormality is
present in over half of miscarriages [9, 10]. Other risk factors include
maternal age greater than 35 years, multiple pregnancies, uterine
malformations, polycystic ovaries, autoimmune factors (such as
phospholipid antibodies, lupus anticoagulant and cardiolipin
antibodies), genetic disorders, poorly controlled diabetes, and a
history of two or more miscarriages [2]. Many of these conditions
can lead to recurrent miscarriage, traditionally defined as three
or more miscarriages [11]. For many women and their partners,
a cause of recurrent miscarriage may never be found. With
the development of ultrasound and improvements in pregnancy
testing, pregnancies can be diagnosed earlier, even if destined for
early miscarriage. These may not have been detected in the past.
Thus, the number of women reporting early pregnancy loss may
increase.
A miscarriage may induce significant emotional distress in both
partners. Initial emotional numbness and denial, anxiety, shock,
sense of loss, sadness, emptiness, anger, inadequacy, blame,
jealousy, depression, sleep disturbance, social withdrawal, anger
and marital disturbance have all been described as emotional
responses to pregnancy loss [12, 13, 14, 15].
Description of the intervention and how it might work
Progesterone and other progestogens can be given to
women orally, vaginally, intramuscularly, or by other routes.
Supplementing a pregnancy with progestin ofen begins early in the
first trimester afer a positive pregnancy test is obtained (under 14
weeks' gestation) and can continue throughout the first trimester
and beyond. The therapeutic intervention can be with natural
progesterone or with any other progestogen that interacts with and
stimulates the progesterone receptor.
Progesterone, a female sex hormone, is known to induce secretory
changes in the lining of the uterus essential for successful
implantation of a fertilized egg. It is secreted chiefly by the corpus
luteum, a group of cells formed in the ovary afer the follicle
ruptures during the release of the egg. It has been suggested that
a causative factor in many cases of miscarriage may be inadequate
secretion of progesterone during the luteal phase of the menstrual
cycle and in the early weeks of pregnancy. Therefore, clinicians
may use progestogens in an attempt to prevent spontaneous
miscarriage beginning in the first trimester of pregnancy. Their use
is particularly common with assisted reproductive technologies.
For women with recurrent miscarriage whose evaluation has not
yielded a specific cause, a deficiency in progesterone as a possible
etiology has led to treatment with supplemental progestogens to
help 'support' the pregnancy.
A review of pregnancy rates following hormonal treatments for
various conditions concluded that the benefits of therapy are
uncertain [16]. A 1989 meta-analysis of six trials concluded that
exogenous progesterone supplementation afer conception does
not improve pregnancy outcomes [3, 17]. It was concluded that low
levels of progesterone in early pregnancy reflected an already failed
pregnancy [11].
Concerns have been raised that the use of progestogens in women
with fertilized, defective ova may cause a delay in spontaneous
abortion due to their uterine-relaxant properties. Reports also
suggest a potential association between intrauterine exposure to
progesterone-containing drugs in the first trimester of pregnancy
and genital abnormalities in male and female fetuses. The risk
of hypospadias (deformities of the penis or urethra, or both) is
5 to 8 per 1000 male births in the general population, but may
be increased with exposure to these drugs [18]. However, some
trials do not report increased risk with exposure to these drugs and
progesterone supplementation is commonly utilized in assisted
reproduction settings. There are insuﬀicient data to quantify the
risk to exposed female fetuses. Due to some of these reports and
the fact that the urogenital groove is fused by 16 weeks, some have
recommended that progesterone-containing drugs be avoided in
the first 16 weeks of pregnancy [18].
Why it is important to do this review
Several Cochrane reviews have been initiated to investigate
diﬀerent interventions for the prevention of miscarriage [2, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23]. In recent years, the trustworthiness of many
trials has come into question. Some trials included in previous
versions of this review have been retracted. The aim of this
updated review is to incorporate the Cochrane Trustworthiness
Screening Tool (TST) to re-evaluate the current trials and update
the trial search in a continued eﬀort to determine the eﬀicacy and
safety of administering prophylactic progesterone in an attempt to
prevent pregnancy loss in the population of women with recurrent
miscarriage. There is a separate Cochrane review on the use of
progestogens for treating women with threatened miscarriage [24].
This is an update of a review last published in 2019.
O B J E C T I V E S
To assess the benefits and harms of progestogens as a preventative
therapy against recurrent miscarriage.
M E T H O D S
For the 2025 update, we instituted the Cochrane Trustworthiness
Screening Tool (TST) for all previously included and new studies.
We updated the search using the terms documented in the
Supplemental material, choosing to only search for new trials afer
the 2019 update. We also dropped the ‘recurrent’ or ‘habitual’
restriction from the search to be more inclusive in an eﬀort to
potentially identify more trials.
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
5

[page 8]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
We followed the Methodological Expectations of Cochrane
Intervention Reviews (MECIR) when conducting the review [25], and
PRISMA 2020 for the reporting [26].
Criteria for considering studies for this review
Types of studies
Randomized or quasi-randomized trials comparing progestogens
given for the prevention of miscarriage with placebo or no
treatment were eligible for inclusion. Cluster-randomized trials
were also eligible for inclusion, but cross-over design trials were not
eligible.
Types of participants
We included women who were diagnosed with recurrent
miscarriage (usually of unknown origin) and who began treatment
with progestogens in the first trimester of pregnancy. We placed
no restriction on the age of participants or past obstetric history
otherwise. Where specified, we limited the analysis to singleton
pregnancies. We excluded women achieving pregnancy by in-vitro
fertilization. We also excluded trials treating women for threatened
miscarriage symptoms.
Types of interventions
We included studies of progestogen therapy, either natural or
synthetic, given prophylactically to prevent recurrent miscarriage
(i.e. loss during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy) versus placebo
therapy or no therapy, regardless of dose, mode of administration
or treatment duration. We considered trials pertaining to the
administration of progestogens starting before pregnancy if
treatment continued afer pregnancy was confirmed.
Outcome measures
Critical outcomes
Critical outcome
•
Miscarriage - defined by trial authors but typically as pregnancy
loss less than 20 weeks' gestation
Important outcomes
Main important outcomes
•
Live birth rate (defined as number of live births in entire study
population)
•
Preterm birth (< 37 weeks' gestation)
Other important outcomes
•
Neonatal death
•
Fetal genital abnormalities
•
Stillbirth (fetal loss afer 20 weeks' gestation in women with a
viable pregnancy afer 20 weeks)
•
Low birthweight less than 2500 g
•
Maternal adverse events
•
Neonatal intensive care unit admission
Other outcomes (exploratory if data available)
Maternal
•
Severity of 'morning sickness' - intensified headache, nausea,
breast tenderness
•
Reported thromboembolic events
•
Depression
•
Admission to special care unit
•
Subsequent fertility
Search methods for identification of studies
The following methods section of this review are a combination
of the methods used up to and including the 2019 update [27],
based on a standard template used by Cochrane Pregnancy and
Childbirth, and then the updated search for this 2024 update,
which was accomplished by the Cochrane Central Editorial Team
Information Specialist.
Electronic searches
For this update, we contacted the Information Specialist with
the Cochrane Central Editorial Team Information Specialist to
perform the trial search. The detailed search terms and strategy
are presented in the Supplemental Materials. The trial search
date for the update was 24 July 2024. We filtered for randomized
controlled trials. Full search details are in Supplementary material
1. Databases searched included the following.
•
Cochrane CENTRAL Register of Controlled Trials (1 January 2017
to 24 July 2024)
•
MEDLINE (2017 to current)
•
Embase (2017 to current)
•
CINAHL (1 October 2017 to 31 July 2024)
•
World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry
Platform
•
ClinicalTrials.gov
For all published versions up to and including the 2019 update, we
searched Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth’s Trials Register by
contacting their Information Specialist (6 July 2017) [27].
Searching other resources
We searched the citation lists of relevant publications, review
articles, abstracts of scientific meetings and included studies for
both published and unpublished works but did not find any
additional references.
We contacted experts in the field for unpublished works. None were
revealed to us.
We obtained all reports that described (or may have described)
randomized controlled trials of prophylactic progestogen to
prevent pregnancy loss for women with recurrent pregnancy loss.
We did not apply any language or date restrictions, and we
attempted to make contact with the trial authors when we required
additional information.
As 
part 
of 
the 
TST 
assessment, 
we 
searched 
the
retractionwatch.com database for retracted studies.
Data collection and analysis
For methods used in the previous version of this review, see the
earlier version of this Cochrane review [27].
For this update, we used the following methods, based on a
standard template used by Cochrane (Supplementary material 6).
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
6

[page 9]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Selection of studies
Two review authors (MB, DH) independently assessed for inclusion
all the potential trials that we identified as a result of the search
strategy for this update. We resolved any disagreement through
discussion or, if required, we consulted a third person.
Additionally, as this Cochrane review introduced the TST, we re-
evaluated all previously included trials with the TST.
Data extraction and management
We designed a form to extract data. For eligible trials, two review
authors extracted the data using the agreed form (DH, TH, PR).
We resolved discrepancies through discussion or, if required, we
consulted a third person. We entered data into Review Manager
sofware and checked for accuracy.
When information regarding any of the above was unclear, we
attempted to contact the authors of the original reports to provide
further details.
Risk of bias assessment in included studies
Two review authors (DH, TH, PR) independently assessed risk of
bias for each study using the criteria outlined in the Cochrane
Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [28]. We resolved
any disagreement by discussion or by involving a third assessor. We
utilized RoB 1 for the risk of bias assessment. Domain descriptions
can be found in Supplementary material 8.
Measures of treatment eﬀect
Dichotomous data
For dichotomous data, we presented results as a summary risk ratio
(RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
Continuous data
None of our outcomes have continuous data. If future updates
add continuous data, we will use the mean diﬀerence if outcomes
are measured in the same way between trials. We will use the
standardized mean diﬀerence to combine trials that measure the
same outcome, but use diﬀerent methods.
Unit of analysis issues
Cluster-randomized trials
We did not include cluster-randomized trials in this Cochrane
review. In future updates, if we identify any high-quality cluster-
randomized trials, we will consider including them in the analyses
along with individually randomized trials. We will adjust their
sample sizes using the methods described in section 16.3.4 of the
Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions, using
an estimate of the intracluster correlation coeﬀicient (ICC) derived
from the trial (if possible), from a similar trial or from a study of
a similar population [29]. If we use ICCs from other sources, we
will report this and conduct sensitivity analyses to investigate the
eﬀect of variation in the ICC. If we identify both cluster-randomized
trials and individually randomized trials, we plan to synthesize the
relevant information. We will consider it reasonable to combine the
results from both if there is little heterogeneity between the study
designs and the interaction between the eﬀect of intervention and
the choice of randomization unit is considered to be unlikely.
We will also acknowledge heterogeneity in the randomization unit
and perform a sensitivity analysis to investigate the eﬀects of the
randomization unit.
Cross-over trials
Cross-over trials are not included as they are inappropriate to the
question.
Other unit of analysis issues
If we identify and include trials with more than two treatment
groups, we will assess the most appropriate way to include the
data. This may be by combining groups to create a pair-wise
comparison, or to select the most appropriate pair of interventions
and exclude the others. We did not identify any such trials.
Dealing with missing data
For included studies, we noted levels of attrition. In future updates
we will explore the impact of including studies with high levels of
missing data in the overall assessment of treatment eﬀects by using
sensitivity analysis.
For all outcomes, we carried out analyses, as far as possible,
on an intention-to-treat basis. That is, we attempted to include
all participants randomized to each group in the analyses, and
all participants were analyzed in the group to which they were
allocated, regardless of whether or not they received the allocated
intervention. The denominator for each outcome in each trial was
the number randomized minus any participants whose outcomes
were known to be missing.
Reporting bias assessment
As there were not more than 10 studies in the meta-analysis, we
did not investigate reporting biases (such as publication bias) using
funnel plots.
Synthesis methods
We carried out statistical analysis using Review Manager sofware
[30, 31]. We planned to use fixed-eﬀect meta-analysis to combine
data where it was reasonable to assume that studies were
estimating the same underlying treatment eﬀect: that is, where
trials were examining the same intervention, and the trials’
populations and methods were judged suﬀiciently similar. If there
was clinical heterogeneity suﬀicient to expect that the underlying
treatment eﬀects diﬀered between trials, or if we detected
substantial statistical heterogeneity, we planned to use random-
eﬀects meta-analysis to produce an overall summary, if an average
treatment eﬀect across trials was considered clinically meaningful.
Where we used random-eﬀects meta-analysis, we treated the
random-eﬀects summary as the average of the range of possible
treatment eﬀects, and we discussed the clinical implications of
treatment eﬀects diﬀering between trials. If the average treatment
eﬀect was not clinically meaningful, we planned not to combine
trials. If we used random-eﬀects analyses, we presented the results
as the average treatment eﬀect with 95% CIs, and the estimates of
Tau2 and I2.
We assessed statistical heterogeneity in each meta-analysis using
the Tau2, I2 [32], and Chi2 statistics [33]. We regarded heterogeneity
as substantial if an I2 statistic was greater than 30% and either the
Tau2 was greater than zero, or there was a low P value (less than
0.10) in the Chi2 test for heterogeneity.
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
7

[page 10]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Investigation of heterogeneity and subgroup analysis
We conducted planned subgroup analyses for the following
subgroups.
•
Placebo-controlled trials only versus trials not having placebo
control
•
Women with at least three previous consecutive miscarriages
versus women with at least two prior miscarriages
•
Route of administration of progestogen: oral, intramuscular or
vaginal versus placebo
We used only the critical outcome in subgroup analysis:
miscarriage.
We assessed subgroup diﬀerences by interaction tests available
within Review Manager [30, 31]. We reported the results of
subgroup analyses quoting the Chi2 statistic and P value, and the
interaction test I2 value.
Equity-related assessment
We did not investigate health inequity in this review as this was not
planned a priori in the protocol.
Sensitivity analysis
We carried out sensitivity analysis to explore the eﬀect of risk of
bias. This involved analysis of trials based on low risk of bias in
order to assess for any substantive diﬀerence to the overall results.
Certainty of the evidence assessment
Assessment of the certainty of the evidence using the GRADE
approach
For this update, we assessed the certainty of the evidence using the
GRADE approach, as outlined in the GRADE Handbook, in order to
assess the certainty of the body of evidence [34]. We assessed the
following outcomes using GRADE.
•
Miscarriage
•
Live birth rate
•
Preterm birth
We did not assess the certainty of the evidence for other outcomes.
We used the GRADEpro Guideline Development Tool to import data
from Review Manager 5 [30], in order to create summary of findings
tables [35]. We produced a summary of the intervention eﬀect and
a measure of certainty for the above outcome using the GRADE
approach [34]. The GRADE approach uses five considerations (study
limitations, consistency of eﬀect, imprecision, indirectness and
publication bias) to assess the quality of the body of evidence
for each outcome. The evidence can be downgraded from 'high
certainty' by one level for serious (or by two levels for very serious)
limitations, depending on assessments for risk of bias, indirectness
of evidence, serious inconsistency, imprecision of eﬀect estimates
or potential publication bias.
At least two authors (DH, TH, PR) assessed the GRADE certainty for
studies. DH reached out to authors for clarification when needed.
Any disagreements were resolved through consensus discussion.
Assessment of trustworthiness using the Trustworthiness
Screening Tool
We utilized the 3-domain TST assessment [36, 37]. For trials where
there were concerns in a domain, we attempted to reach out to
the authors for clarification. For those studies, we moved them to
the ‘Awaiting further classification’ category. For trials that were
identified as retracted, we moved them to ‘Excluded’.
Two authors (DH, MB) assessed the TST for studies. DH reached out
to authors for clarification when needed. Any disagreements were
resolved through consensus discussion.
Consumer involvement
For this update, there were no consumers involved, other than for
the review of the Plain Language Summary.
R E S U L T S
Description of studies
Results of the search
See Figure 1 for full details of the updated search process
(Supplementary material 1; Supplementary material 7). The trial
search was performed on 25 July 2024 and covered publications up
to 24 July 2024.
 
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
8

[page 11]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Figure 1.   PRISMA flow diagram
12 studies included 
in previous version 
of review
870 records 
identified through 
database searching
685 records after 
duplicates removed
685 records 
screened
684 records 
excluded
1 full-text article 
assessed for 
eligibility
1 full-text article 
excluded (Shinwari 
2024), due to 
wrong comparator: 
it compared the 
route of 
administration of 
the intervention 
without a placebo 
group.  
Four previously 
ongoing studies 
have been 
excluded: one due 
to wrong 
population, one 
due to wrong 
comparator and 
two due to the very 
long time since 
protocol 
publication (20 
years) with no 
further data or 
publications. 
No new studies 
included.  
 
 
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
9

[page 12]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Figure 1.   (Continued)
No new studies 
included.  
One study 
previously 
included was 
excluded due to 
being retracted 
(Kumar 2014).
Two previously 
included studies 
were moved to 
awaiting 
classification, due 
to lack of details 
and no response 
from the authors 
to clarify.
9 studies included 
in qualitative 
synthesis
8 studies included 
in quantitative 
synthesis 
(meta-analysis)
 
The initial search discovered 870 new trial records. In August 2024,
afer removing duplicates, we screened 685 records. We excluded
684 records as not relevant. We retrieved one new potential
study (Shinwari 2024 [38]), but excluded it for having the wrong
comparator; both groups received the intervention (orally versus
vaginally) without a placebo or ‘no intervention’ group.
We used the Cochrane Trustworthiness Screening Tool (TST) to
assess all studies that appeared to meet the inclusion criteria.
Figure 2 displays the results of the three domains evaluated for the
individual studies.
 
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10

[page 13]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Figure 2.   Cochrane Trustworthiness Screening Tool results for eligible trials. Evaluation in the three domains.
Colors: Green represents no concerns, Yellow represents some concerns or uncertainty, Red indicates serious
concerns
 
We excluded one previously included study (Kumar 2014 [39]), as it
has been retracted (Supplementary material 3).
One previously included study was a conference abstract and had
no published results (Agarwal 2016 [40]); we moved this to awaiting
classification. We also moved another previously included study to
awaiting classification (Ghosh 2014 [41, 42, 43]), afer evaluation
using the TST and needing additional information (Supplementary
material 4). The authors initially responded to an email query
(to say that it was received) but never replied to the question.
Subsequent attempts to contact them over two months were
unsuccessful. A final study previously categorized as awaiting
classification has since been retracted (Ismail 2017 [44, 45, 46]), so
we have now excluded this study.
We have excluded all the previously ongoing studies. One study
had the wrong population (women with threatened miscarriage)
(Mc Lindon 2023 [47]), and one had the wrong intervention as it
compared cyclosporine to progestogen (NCT02706470 [48]). The
remaining two studies were published as protocols 20 years ago,
with no further information or data available (NCT00193674 [49];
Walch 2005 [50]).
This resulted in a total of nine included trials, which randomized
1426 participants. (Table 1, Supplementary material 2).
Included studies
Trial design characteristics
Baseline characteristics of participants
Number of prior miscarriages
Three trials required women to have had three or more consecutive
miscarriages (Coomarasamy 2015 [51, 52, 53]; El-Zibdeh 2005 [54,
55, 56]; Le Vine 1964 [57]), and six trials required women to have
suﬀered two or more consecutive miscarriages (Goldzieher 1964
[58]; Klopper 1965 [59]; MacDonald 1972 [60]; Reijnders 1988 [61];
Shearman 1963 [62, 63]; Swyer 1953 [64]). In addition, one study
(MacDonald 1972) required women to have cervical mucus ferning
as evidence of "significant hormonal imbalance".
Only one study excluded women who had experienced a live birth
(Klopper 1965).
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
11

[page 14]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Gestation
Most other trials recruited women in the first trimester of pregnancy
with various cutoﬀs of gestational age. One trial accepted women
to the 16th gestational week (Le Vine 1964).
Interventions
Route of administration
Four trials administered treatment orally (El-Zibdeh 2005;
Goldzieher 1964; Klopper 1965; MacDonald 1972); three
administered treatment intramuscularly (Le Vine 1964; Reijnders
1988; Shearman 1963); one used vaginal micronized progesterone
(Coomarasamy 2015); and one used progestogen pellets inserted
into the gluteal muscle (Swyer 1953).
Dosage and type of progestogen
Of the trials that administered treatment orally, one study used
a dose of 10 mg/day medroxyprogesterone (Goldzieher 1964),
one study used a twice-daily dose of cyclopentyl enol ether of
progesterone (Enol Luteovis), (Klopper 1965), while two used 10 mg
of oral dydrogesterone either twice daily (El-Zibdeh 2005) or three
times daily (MacDonald 1972).
In the three trials that administered treatment intramuscularly, two
trials used a dose of 500 mg of hydroxyprogesterone caproate (Le
Vine 1964; Reijnders 1988), while the third study used a staggered
dose, also of hydroxyprogesterone caproate, of between 250 mg
and 500 mg depending on week of gestation (Shearman 1963).
The remaining two trials delivered treatment via 400 mg micronized
progesterone vaginally (Coomarasamy 2015), and six doses of 25
mg progesterone pellets inserted within the gluteal muscle (Swyer
1953).
Duration of treatment
Trials typically began therapy at trial entry. Gestational age
at entry varied or was not specifically stated (Supplementary
material 2). There was a wide variation in treatment duration
between trials. One study continued treatment until the 24th
week of pregnancy (Shearman 1963); and one study continued
treatment until miscarriage or until 36 weeks' gestation (Le Vine
1964). Several trials continued treatment until the 12th week of
gestation (Coomarasamy 2015; El-Zibdeh 2005; Reijnders 1988).
In the remaining four trials, treatment duration was either not
stated or was unclear (Goldzieher 1964; Klopper 1965; MacDonald
1972; Swyer 1953). Klopper 1965 stated that they hospitalized
participants starting at under 10 weeks' gestation until they were 18
weeks' gestation, but it was unclear how long the treatment lasted.
Placebo/control
Seven of the included trials compared treatment with placebo
(Coomarasamy 2015; Goldzieher 1964; Klopper 1965; Le Vine 1964;
MacDonald 1972; Reijnders 1988; Shearman 1963). The remaining
two trials compared progestogen administration with no treatment
(El-Zibdeh 2005; Swyer 1953). The El-Zibdeh 2005 trial had a third
arm (n = 50) which received human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)
injections, which were not included in this analysis.
Contribution to meta-analysis
One study included women with recurrent pregnancy loss among
all recruited women but did not report outcomes for this group
separately, so did not contribute to the meta-analysis (Reijnders
1988). All other included trials contributed data to at least one
comparison (8 trials, 1276 participants with analyzed data).
Studied outcomes for trials contributing to meta-analysis
•
Miscarriage: eight trials included miscarriage as an outcome
(Coomarasamy 2015; El-Zibdeh 2005; Goldzieher 1964; Klopper
1965; Le Vine 1964; MacDonald 1972; Shearman 1963; Swyer
1953).
•
Live birth rate: specifically reported by two trials (Coomarasamy
2015; Swyer 1953). For other trials, extrapolated from data if they
presented birth data and reported individual or group outcomes
and either reported a number of stillbirths or did not note
any stillbirths. Five trials contributed data (Coomarasamy 2015;
Goldzieher 1964; Le Vine 1964; MacDonald 1972; Swyer 1953).
•
Preterm birth: four trials reported preterm delivery (El-Zibdeh
2005; Goldzieher 1964; Le Vine 1964; Swyer 1953).
•
Intrauterine 
fetal 
death/stillbirth: 
two 
trials 
reported
intrauterine fetal death/stillbirth as an outcome (Coomarasamy
2015; Swyer 1953).
•
Fetal 
genital 
abnormalities/teratogenic 
eﬀects, 
fetal
deformities: three trials reported fetal or genital abnormalities,
or both, as an outcome (Coomarasamy 2015; El-Zibdeh 2005; Le
Vine 1964).
•
Neonatal death: three trials contributed data for neonatal death
(Coomarasamy 2015; El-Zibdeh 2005; Swyer 1953).
•
Low birthweight less than 2500 g: several trials reported
birthweight as an outcome, but none categorized it as less than
2500 g.
•
Severity of morning sickness, intensified headache, nausea,
or breast tenderness: no trials reported on these as separate
outcomes.
•
Thromboembolic events: no trials reported thromboembolic
rates as an outcome.
•
Admission to special care unit: no trials reported admission to
special care units as an outcome.
•
Maternal depression: no trials reported maternal depression as
an outcome.
•
Subsequent fertility: no trials reported subsequent fertility as an
outcome.
Support/sponsorship
Six trials reported what appeared to be support or sponsorship
from pharmaceutical companies (Goldzieher 1964; Klopper 1965;
MacDonald 1972; Reijnders 1988; Shearman 1963; Swyer 1953).
One reported funding by governmental grants from the UK
(Coomarasamy 2015). One trial did not mention any support (Le
Vine 1964). (See Supplementary material 2).
All the trials either declared no competing interests (Coomarasamy
2015) or did not state if any interests existed (El-Zibdeh 2005;
Goldzieher 1964; Klopper 1965; Le Vine 1964; MacDonald 1972;
Reijnders 1988; Shearman 1963). One study mentioned specifically
that one of the authors was grateful to a provider of the study drug
but did not clarify the relationship (Swyer 1953).
Number of centers
Some of the trials were multicenter (Coomarasamy 2015;
Goldzieher 1964; Klopper 1965; Shearman 1963; Swyer 1953), the
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
12

[page 15]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
rest were either single-center trials (El-Zibdeh 2005; MacDonald
1972), or the number of centers was unclear (Le Vine 1964; Reijnders
1988).
Excluded studies
On obtaining the full papers, we found that five trials were not
randomized controlled trials (Check 1985 [65]; Check 1987a [66];
Daya 1988 [67]; Rock 1985 [68]; Sidelnikova 1990 [69]), and it
was unclear if there was any randomization in another (Check
1987b [70]). Five trials were not concerned with investigating the
eﬀects of progestogen for miscarriage, but were concerned with
investigating other eﬀects of progesterone, such as on preterm
birth or other outcomes (Brenner 1962 [71]; Johnson 1975 [72];
Kyrou 2011 [73]; Sondergaard 1985 [74]; Turner 1966 [75]), three
used progestogen combination therapy rather than progestogen
alone (Check 1995 [76]; Prietl 1992 [77]; Shu 2002 [78]), one did not
administer progestogen during pregnancy (Cliﬀord 1996 [79]), and
one compared two types of progestogen rather than progestogen
with no treatment or a placebo group (Smitz 1992 [80]). One
trial was excluded due to using progestogen therapy afer 20
weeks' gestation to prevent preterm labor (Norman 2006 [81]). We
excluded one additional trial due to it being terminated before data
collection was complete (Fuchs 1966 [82]).
As stated above, for this update, we excluded two trials afer their
retraction (Ismail 2017; Kumar 2014). Previous updates to this
review excluded four studies which treated threatened miscarriage
(Berle 1980 [83]; Gerhard 1987 [84]; Moller 1965 [85]; Tognoni 1980
[86]), and two with ineligible patient populations (Corrado 2002
[87]; Nyboe Anderson 2002 [88]). See Supplementary material 3 for
more details.
Studies awaiting classification
We instituted the Cochrane TST for this update. On evaluation of the
included studies, we found two that needed further information.
Agarwal 2016 had results available in a trial registry, but the
data were otherwise unpublished, making it impossible to answer
several study characteristic questions. We reached out to the
authors for the last update but did not receive a response. An
additional query was sent for this update with no response. Ghosh
2014 had characteristics of the two groups which were very similar,
and it was not registered. To fully evaluate the TST, we sent emails
to the contact author. While we received an initial response that
they would get back to us, subsequent queries over the following
months did not receive a response. We have now moved these
studies from 'included studies' to 'studies awaiting classification'
until a clarification response is received.
Risk of bias in included studies
See Figure 3 and Figure 4 for a summary of risk of bias in included
trials.
 
Figure 3.   Risk of bias graph: review authors' judgments about each risk of bias item presented as percentages
across all included studies
Random sequence generation (selection bias)
Allocation concealment (selection bias)
Blinding of participants and personnel (performance bias): All outcomes
Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias): All outcomes
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): All outcomes
Selective reporting (reporting bias)
Other bias
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Low risk of bias
Unclear risk of bias
High risk of bias
 
 
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
13

[page 16]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Figure 4.   Risk of bias summary: review authors' judgments about each risk of bias item for each included study
Random sequence generation (selection bias)
Allocation concealment (selection bias)
Blinding of participants and personnel (performance bias): All outcomes
Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias): All outcomes
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): All outcomes
Selective reporting (reporting bias)
Other bias
Coomarasamy 2015
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
El-Zibdeh 2005
−
−
+
+
+
+
+
Goldzieher 1964
?
+
+
+
+
+
+
Klopper 1965
+
?
+
+
+
+
+
Le Vine 1964
−
−
+
+
−
+
+
MacDonald 1972
?
?
+
+
+
+
+
Reijnders 1988
?
+
+
+
+
+
+
Shearman 1963
?
?
+
+
+
+
+
Swyer 1953
?
−
+
+
+
+
+
 
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
14

[page 17]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Of the nine trials that met the inclusion criteria, two had a low risk
of bias for random sequence generation. One of the trials reported
computer-generated or other adequate methods of randomization
(Coomarasamy 2015), and one used a random table produced by
a statistician (Klopper 1965). We found a high risk of bias for two
trials: one used alternation (Le Vine 1964), and one randomized
by day of the week (El-Zibdeh 2005). The risk of bias for random
sequence generation was unclear for four other trials, mainly due
to lack of information (Goldzieher 1964; MacDonald 1972; Reijnders
1988; Shearman 1963). In one study, two centers took part (Swyer
1953). One center allocated by alternation, while the paper stated
that the other used "randomization". However, the method of
randomization was not stated and thus risk of bias is unclear (Swyer
1953).
Regarding allocation concealment, of the nine trials that met the
inclusion criteria, we assessed three to be at low risk of bias. Two
of these trials used sequentially numbered ampules provided by
a central source or the pharmaceutical company (Coomarasamy
2015; Reijnders 1988). The third study used sequentially numbered
bottles, and the code was not broken until the end of the trial
(Goldzieher 1964).
Three trials used clearly inadequate methods of allocation
concealment, based on the day of the week or alternating A/
B groups (El-Zibdeh 2005; Le Vine 1964; Swyer 1953); while the
allocation in the remaining three trials was unclear (Klopper 1965;
MacDonald 1972; Shearman 1963).
Some trials blinded participants and providers, but the majority
of trials did not report on blinding of participants, providers,
or outcome assessors. However, because the outcomes of
miscarriage, live birth, etc. are unlikely to be influenced by
knowledge of assignment group, in line with the Cochrane
Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [28], we also
assessed these to be at low risk of bias, even when blinding was not
explicitly stated.
Seven trials used double-blinding, where both the participant and
treating provider did not know the allocation (Coomarasamy 2015;
Goldzieher 1964; Klopper 1965; Le Vine 1964; MacDonald 1972;
Reijnders 1988; Shearman 1963). The remaining two trials did not
mention eﬀorts at blinding, but as the outcomes were unlikely to
be influenced by blinding eﬀorts, we assessed both to be at low risk
of bias (El-Zibdeh 2005; Swyer 1953).
Few trials stated whether outcome assessors specifically were
blinded. However, two stated that "study personnel" of some type
were blinded (Coomarasamy 2015; Shearman 1963). The remainder
did not clearly state that outcome assessors were blinded, but it is
unlikely that knowledge of assignment would influence outcomes
being assessed, so we assessed these to be at low risk of bias.
Most trials had low rates of attrition and accounted for participants
well.
One study reported a large number of dropouts (Le Vine 1964). Fify-
six women were randomized, but 26 women were excluded from
the analysis: 16 were found not to be pregnant afer they had been
randomized, and 10 failed to return for injections.
The majority of trials reported on all planned outcomes relevant to
this review.
We assessed all trials to be at low risk of other potential sources of
bias.
Publication bias
We were unable to assess publication bias due to there being too
few studies included.
See Supplementary material 2 tables for individual details.
Synthesis of results
Nine trials (1340 participants) met the inclusion criteria. Only
eight trials (1276 participants) contributed data to the analyses
(Supplementary material 5). Because of clinical heterogeneity in
the interventions identified, we used random-eﬀects models for all
comparisons.
Progestogen versus placebo/no treatment
Critical outcomes
Miscarriage
The meta-analysis of the eight included trials (1276 participants)
and suggests that progestogen supplementation probably makes
little to no diﬀerence to the miscarriage rate compared to placebo
or no treatment (27.2% versus 30.9%, risk ratio (RR) 0.91, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 0.76 to 1.07; I2 = 0%; moderate-certainty
evidence; Analysis 1.1, Summary of findings 1). This is based on
moderate-certainty evidence, with evidence being downgraded for
limitations in study design.
A sensitivity analysis eliminating the three trials at potentially
higher risk of bias (having one or more areas assessed as potentially
high risk of bias: El-Zibdeh 2005; Le Vine 1964; Swyer 1953)
confirmed there was little to no diﬀerence in miscarriage outcomes
(RR 0.98, 95% CI 0.82 to 1.18).
Trials with placebo controls
We carried out a subgroup analysis comparing trials that did use
a placebo control (Coomarasamy 2015; Goldzieher 1964; Klopper
1965; Le Vine 1964; MacDonald 1972; Shearman 1963) and those
that did not use a placebo (El-Zibdeh 2005; Swyer 1953). There was
no strong evidence of a subgroup diﬀerence as indicated by the
subgroup interaction test (test for subgroup diﬀerences: Chi2 = 3.32,
df = 1 (P = 0.07), I2 = 69.9%; Analysis 1.2).
Women with a history of three or more consecutive miscarriages
Three trials enrolled only participants who had suﬀered three
or more consecutive miscarriages (Coomarasamy 2015; El-Zibdeh
2005; Le Vine 1964). The rest of the trials enrolled participants
with two or more prior miscarriages or did not specify. The
largest trial enrolled participants with three or more prior
miscarriages (Coomarasamy 2015). There was no evidence of
subgroup diﬀerences in these groups of trials in their eﬀects for the
two populations (test for subgroup diﬀerences: Chi2 = 1.05, df = 1 (P
= 0.31), I2 = 4.7%).
Route of administration of progestogen
There was no evidence of a subgroup diﬀerence based on the route
of administration of the progestogen as indicated by the subgroup
interaction test (test for subgroup diﬀerences: Chi2 = 1.28, df = 2 (P
= 0.53), I2 = 0%).
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
15

[page 18]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Important outcomes
Live birth rate
Two trials specifically reported live birth rate (Coomarasamy 2015;
Swyer 1953), and we were able to extrapolate the live birth rate from
the results given in a further three trials (Goldzieher 1964; Le Vine
1964; MacDonald 1972). The evidence suggested that progestogen
supplementation made little to no diﬀerence in live birth rates for
women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology compared to
placebo or no treatment (69.0% vs 66.0%, RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.96 to
1.12; 5 trials, 1063 women; moderate-certainty evidence; Analysis
1.5).
Preterm birth
Four trials reported an incidence of premature birth (El-Zibdeh
2005; Goldzieher 1964; Le Vine 1964; Swyer 1953). We are uncertain
about the eﬀect on the rate of preterm birth due to very low-
certainty evidence (9.4% vs. 7.5%, RR 1.15, 95% CI 0.55 to 2.41, 4
trials, 256 participants, very low-certainty evidence; Analysis 1.6).
Neonatal death
Three trials reported neonatal death as an outcome (Coomarasamy
2015; El-Zibdeh 2005; Swyer 1953) (RR 1.67, 95% CI 0.33 to 8.52; 3
trials, 724 participants; Analysis 1.7).
Fetal genital abnormalities
Three trials reported fetal genital abnormalities or virilization as
an outcome (Coomarasamy 2015; El-Zibdeh 2005; Le Vine 1964)
(RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.07 to 16.50; 3 trials, 665 participants; Analysis
1.8). Two trials reported no incidence of fetal abnormalities (El-
Zibdeh 2005; Le Vine 1964). One study reported a single case of
fetal genital abnormality in both groups (Coomarasamy 2015). One
study reported two anomalies in the progestogen group (neural
tube defect and non-immune hydrops) and one case of multiple
anomalies in the control group in a baby with Down's syndrome (El-
Zibdeh 2005). No genital anomalies were noted in that study.
Stillbirth
Two trials reported rates of stillbirth (Coomarasamy 2015; Swyer
1953) (RR 0.53, 95% CI 0.05 to 5.79; 2 trials, 644 participants;
Analysis 1.9).Swyer 1953 did not have any cases of stillbirth.
Low birthweight (less than 2500 g)
No included studies reported low birthweight by this definition.
Maternal adverse events
One study listed maternal adverse eﬀects as outcomes (Le Vine
1964), but did not note any events.
Other important outcomes
None of the trials reported on our remaining planned important
mother or child outcomes.
•
Severity of 'morning sickness' - intensified headache, nausea,
breast tenderness
•
Reported thromboembolic events
•
Depression
•
Admission to special care unit
•
Subsequent fertility
Equity assessment
Not performed.
Reporting biases
None noted.
D I S C U S S I O N
Summary of main results
The aim of this review was to assess the eﬀectiveness of
progestogens in preventing recurrent miscarriage. This update
imposed the Cochrane Trustworthiness Screening Tool (TST) on
the evidence, which eliminated trials and changed the conclusion
of the review. While there has been much speculation that
progestogens may reduce the miscarriage recurrence rate, the
results of this updated meta-analysis provide moderate-certainty
evidence that progestogen supplementation probably makes little
to no diﬀerence to the miscarriage rate for women with recurrent
miscarriage. Subgroup analyses comparing placebo-controlled
versus non-placebo-controlled trials, trials of women with three
or more prior miscarriages compared to women with two or more
miscarriages, and diﬀerent routes of administration showed no
clear diﬀerences between subgroups for reducing miscarriage.
All the important outcomes reported likely also showed little to
no diﬀerences with progesterone therapy (moderate-to very low-
certainty evidence).
The meta-analyses showed there may be little or no diﬀerence
in stillbirths, neonatal death or the number of fetal abnormalities
(including virilization and hypospadias) in babies whose mothers
had been given progestogens whilst in utero.
No trials reported any adverse maternal eﬀects. There were many
other planned important outcomes not reported. Recently, a core
outcome set was developed through international consensus for
trials of miscarriage prevention [89]. The final proposed core
outcomes for miscarriage prevention by the consensus group
comprise 12 outcomes: pregnancy loss < 24 weeks’ gestation, live
birth, gestation at birth, preterm birth, congenital abnormalities,
fetal growth restriction, maternal (antenatal) complications,
compliance with intervention, patient satisfaction, maternal
hospitalization, neonatal or infant hospitalization, and neonatal or
infant death.
Limitations of the evidence included in the review
Overall, we judged most of the trials to be at low risk of bias for
most of the domains. The majority of the trials were conducted
before robust reporting of methods was instituted. For many of
the older trials, the overall quality appears to be reasonable within
the context of standards at the time at which the trials were
performed. The more recent publications were generally of better
quality, with low risks of bias. This diﬀerence in reporting standards
is commonly seen in reviews that include trials published before
uniform reporting guidelines such as CONSORT were developed
[90]. Additionally, imposing the Cochrane TST on this review
excluded two retracted trials and moved others to 'awaiting
classification', as authors have not yet responded to us. Ensuring
only trustworthy trials are included is important, as we have now
seen with this review, as the conclusions have changed with the
exclusion of some large trials.
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
16

[page 19]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Overall, the evidence ranged from very low to moderate certainty,
based on the GRADE system [34]. We assessed the certainty of
evidence for the critical outcome of miscarriage and the main
important outcomes of live birth rate and preterm birth. Limitations
in study design led to the downgrading of evidence to moderate
certainty for the outcomes miscarriage and live birth rate. While
the 95% confidence intervals for these outcomes did cross 1.0,
we deemed them not to be wide and thus did not downgrade
for imprecision. Limitations in study design and very serious
limitations in imprecision led to the downgrading of evidence to
very low certainty for the outcome preterm birth.
This updated review did not add any new trials, but did exclude
others, which altered conclusions. All the previous trials that were
listed as ongoing have now been categorized.
As most of the included trials had diﬀerent entry criteria and
duration of therapy, determining a uniform protocol for treatment
would be diﬀicult.
The trials were mostly from Europe, North America, and the UK,
with one trial in Jordan. This potentially limits the generalizability
to low- and middle-income countries, or to people not well
represented in the trials.
Limitations of the review processes
We took steps to minimize bias at every step of the review process:
a comprehensive search of the literature was performed in order
to identify all relevant studies and two authors independently
assessed the studies, performed data extraction and GRADE
assessments. None of the review authors were involved in any of
the included or excluded trials. We are unaware of any potential
biases inherent in refocusing this update on women with recurrent
pregnancies alone. The addition of a fourth review author in
this update allowed for assessment and consensus around the
study assessments and inclusion of the TST. There was no funding
provided for this review.
Agreements and disagreements with other studies or
reviews
Two previously published systematic reviews agreed with our prior
version's findings [91] [92]. However, those reviews included trials
now excluded afer retraction. A separate Cochrane review has also
been conducted on the use of progestogens for treating women
with threatened miscarriage, and this suggests a potential benefit
in live birth for women with early pregnancy bleeding and previous
miscarriages treated with progestogens [93].
A U T H O R S '   C O N C L U S I O N S
Implications for practice
For 
women 
with 
unexplained 
recurrent 
miscarriage,
supplementation with progestogen therapy probably has little to
no eﬀect on the rate of miscarriage in subsequent pregnancies.
Equity-related implications for practice
Progestogen supplementation for recurrent miscarriage of unclear
etiology will increase costs either for the health system or for
the pregnant person. Many forms of progestogen may require
compounding pharmacies and may be diﬀicult to obtain in low-
resource settings. However, given the findings of little to no benefit,
equity-related implications may be less relevant.
Implications for research
As noted, the included trials utilized many diﬀerent treatment
protocols, including when the progestogen was started and how
long into gestation it was continued. Future trials would benefit
from a more standard treatment protocol using the published core
outcome set [89]. This would also aid the translation into practice.
Additionally, as many of the trials were published before 1990
and the methods to evaluate patients with recurrent miscarriage
have evolved, trials including participants who have undergone a
complete modern evaluation (similar to the Coomarasamy 2015
trial) may be needed. Including patient-centered outcomes such
as progestogen tolerability and comparing the diﬀerent routes
or types of progestogens may also be beneficial. It is unclear if
the therapy might be beneficial (or harmful) for diﬀerent patient
groups.
S U P P L E M E N T A R Y   M A T E R I A L S
Supplementary materials are available with the online version of
this article: 10.1002/14651858.CD003511.pub5.
Supplementary material 1 Search strategies
Supplementary material 2 Characteristics of included studies
Supplementary material 3 Characteristics of excluded studies
Supplementary material 4 Characteristics of studies awaiting
classification
Supplementary material 5 Analyses
Supplementary material 6 Data package
Supplementary material 7 Trial Search Report for 2024 update
Supplementary material 8 Risk of Bias 1 Domains evaluated in this
review
A D D I T I O N A L   I N F O R M A T I O N
Acknowledgements
The review authors would like to thank Charlene Bridges for her
comprehensive updated trial search for this update.
The views and opinions expressed therein are those of the authors.
Editorial and peer-reviewer contributions
Cochrane Central Editorial Services and the Cochrane Maternal,
Newborn, Child Health Thematic Group supported the authors in
the development of this review.
The following people conducted the editorial process for this
article.
•
Sign-oﬀ Editor (final editorial decision): Signed oﬀ by Senior
Editor Zarko Alfirevic
•
Managing Editor (selected peer reviewers, provided editorial
guidance to authors, edited the article): Sue Marcus, Cochrane
Central Editorial Service
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
17

[page 20]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
•
Editorial Assistant (conducted editorial policy checks, collated
peer-reviewer comments and supported editorial team):
Cynthia Staﬀord, Cochrane Central Editorial Service
•
Copy Editor (copy editing and production): Andrea Takeda,
Cochrane Central Production Service
•
Peer-reviewers (provided comments and recommended an
editorial decision): Ka Wang Cheung, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, the University of Hong Kong (clinical/
content review); Sameeksha Shetty, Tufs University (consumer
review); Jo-Ana Chase, Cochrane Evidence Production and
Methods Directorate (methods review); Jo Platt, Central
Editorial Information Specialist (search review). One additional
peer reviewer provided clinical/content review peer-review but
chose not to be publicly acknowledged.
Contributions of authors
David Haas: is the guarantor of the review; prepared the 2013
update and all subsequent updates; performed independent data
extraction and quality assessment of the included trials, and
commented on all drafs of the review.
Magdalena Bofill: performed independent trial evaluation and
quality assessment of included trials and updated ongoing trial
categorization; contributed to and commented on the drafs for this
update.
Taylor Hathaway: performed independent data extraction and
quality assessment of included trials for the updates; commented
on the drafs for this update.
Patrick Ramsey: performed independent data extraction and
quality assessment of included trials for the updates; commented
on the drafs for this update.
Declarations of interest
David M Haas: none known related to this work. He is a Senior
Editor with the Cochrane Central Editorial Unit but receives no
compensation for that work. Additionally, he had no editorial
responsibilities or influence on this review.
Magdalena Bofill: Royal Australian and New Zealand College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RANZCOG). Description: I am
employed to prepare evidence summaries for RANZCOG guidelines
and the review is used as evidence. End Date: ongoing/no known
end date.
Taylor J Hathaway: none known related to this work.
Patrick S Ramsey: Texas Collaborative for Healthy Mothers and
Babies: I serve as Chief Medical Oﬀicer for TCHMB - TCHMB is the
state perinatal quality collaborative. I receive 0.2 FTE to protect
my time for my work in this role. UpToDate web-based resource -
Author of ‘Obesity in Pregnancy’ chapter.
Sources of support
Internal sources
•
Indiana University School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, USA
In-kind support
External sources
•
None, Other
No external sources of support received.
Registration and protocol
Per Cochrane review standard procedure.
Previous versions of this review are published [94, 95, 96].
Data, code and other materials
Not applicable.
What's new
 
Date
Event
Description
11 June 2025
New citation required and conclusions
have changed
Review updated. New search performed. Additional author in-
cluded (MB). Trustworthiness Screening Tool implemented for all
studies, leading to two being excluded for study withdrawal and
two previously included studies being moved to Awaiting Classi-
fication. Conclusions changed.
11 June 2025
New search has been performed
New search performed, up to July 25, 2024.
 
History
Protocol first published: Issue 1, 2002
Review first published: Issue 4, 2003
 
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
18

[page 21]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Date
Event
Description
19 November 2019
Amended
Since publication of the 2018 update of this review, we have
been advised that the Ismail 2017 study is currently the subject
of an investigation by the Journal of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal
Medicine. We have now moved this study from 'included studies'
to 'Supplementary material 4' until the outcome of the investiga-
tion is known. We have also highlighted this in the abstract and
plain language summary.
19 November 2019
New citation required but conclusions
have not changed
We have republished the amended version with a new citation
14 November 2019
Amended
We have made further amendments to this review to clarify the
reasons for moving Ismail 2017 from Included to Supplemen-
tary material 4. We have edited text in results/studies awaiting
classification', characteristics of studies awaiting classification,
and published notes, in order to make the following information
more visible.
Since publication of the 2018 update of this review, we have
been advised that the Ismail 2017 study is currently the subject
of an investigation by the Journal of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal
Medicine. We have now moved this study from 'included studies'
to 'Supplementary material 4' until the outcome of the investiga-
tion is known.
16 October 2019
Amended
One study, previously included (Ismail 2017), has been moved to
Supplementary material 4, pending clarification about the study
data.
We have added a Published notes to clarify that this review will
no longer be updated in its current form.
6 July 2017
New search has been performed
Search updated. 'Summary of findings' table incorporated
6 July 2017
New citation required but conclusions
have not changed
Title amended and focus of review changed from treatment of all
miscarriage to treatment of recurrent miscarriage. This was done
to eliminate treatment for threatened miscarriage as that is cov-
ered in a separate Review [24].
Five trials added (Agarwal 2016; Coomarasamy 2015; Ghosh
2014; Ismail 2017a; Kumar 2014); six trials previously includ-
ed are now excluded (Berle 1980; Corrado 2002; Gerhard 1987;
Moller 1965; Nyboe Anderson 2002; Tognoni 1980). They were ex-
cluded as they dealt strictly with women with threatened miscar-
riage or a different population. Co-author added.
1 August 2013
New search has been performed
Search updated and four new trials identified. One was includ-
ed (MacDonald 1972), two excluded (Kyrou 2011; Shu 2002), and
one is ongoing (Coomarasamy 2012). Three previously included
trials (Moller 1965a; Moller 1965b; Moller 1965c) are in fact three
separate reports from one trial (Moller 1965a).
1 August 2013
New citation required but conclusions
have not changed
No changes to conclusions.
12 May 2009
Amended
Contact details updated
11 February 2008
Amended
Converted to new review format
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
19

[page 22]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Date
Event
Description
31 January 2008
New citation required but conclusions
have not changed
This update has been prepared by a new review team.
31 January 2008
New search has been performed
Search updated. Four new trials identified: we included El-
Zibdeh 2005 and excluded Norman 2006. Two are ongoing
(NCT00193674; Walch 2005).
The inclusion of El-Zibdeh 2005 narrows the confidence intervals
(CI) of the outcomes it contained, including narrowing the CI for
women with a history of three or more miscarriages; thus leading
to the strengthening of the conclusions somewhat.
 
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
20

[page 23]
Cochrane
Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.
 
 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
R E F E R E N C E S
 
1.  McBride WZ. Spontaneous abortion. American Family
Physician 1991;43:175-82.
2.  Lede R, Duley L. Uterine muscle relaxant drugs
for threatened miscarriage. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2005, Issue 3. Art. No: CD002857. [DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD002857.pub2]
3.  Regan L, Braude PB, Trembath PR. Influences of past
reproductive performance on risk of spontaneous abortion. BMJ
1989;299:541-5.
4.  Coulam CB. Epidemiology of recurrent spontaneous
abortion. American Journal of Reproductive Immunology
1991;26:23-7.
5.  Grudzinskas JG. Endocrinocolgical and metabolical
assessment of early pregnancy. In: Chamberlain G, editor(s).
Tumbull's Obstetrics. London: Pearson Professional Ltd, 1995.
6.  Howie PG. Abortion and ectopic pregnancy. In: Whitfield CR,
editor(s). Dewhurst's Textbook of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
for Postgraduates. Oxford: Blackwell Science Ltd, 1995.
7.  Simpson JL. Fetal wastage. In: Gabe SG, Simpson JL,
editor(s). Obstetrics. Normal and Problem Pregnancies. New
York: Churchill Livingstone Inc, 1991.
8.  Neilson JP, Hickey M, Vazquez J. Medical treatment for
early fetal death (less than 24 weeks). Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 3. Art. No: CD002253. [DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD002253.pub3]
9.  Burgoyne PS, Holland K, Stephens R. Incidence of numerical
chromosome anomalies in human pregnancy estimation from
induced and spontaneous abortion data. Human Reproduction
1991;6(4):555-65.
10.  Szabo I, Szilagyi A. Management of threatened abortion.
Early Pregnancy 1996;2(4):233-40.
11.  Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. The
management of recurrent miscarriage. www.rcog.org.uk/
guidelines/recurrent.html (accessed 2001).
12.  Atkin LC, Arcelus M, Fernandez A, Tolbert K. La Psicologia en
el Ambito Perinatal. Mexico D.F: INPER, 1988.
13.  Dyregrove A, Mathieson SB. Stillbirth, neonatal death and
SIDS: parental reactions. Scandanavian Journal of Psychology
1987;28:104-14.
14.  Vance JC, Foster WJ, Najman JM, Embelton, Thearle MJ,
Hogden FM. Early parental responses to sudden infant death,
stillbirth or neonatal death. Medical Journal of Australia
1991;155(5):292-7.
15.  Woods JR, Esposito JL. Pregnancy Loss: Medical
Therapeutics and Practical Considerations. Baltimore: Williams
and Wilkins, 1987.
16.  Karamadian LM, Grimes DA. Luteal phase deficiency. Eﬀect
of treatment on pregnancy rates. American Journal of Obstetrics
and Gynecology 1992;167:1391-8.
17.  Goldstein P, Berrier J, Rosen S, Sacks HS, Chalmers TC. A
meta-analysis of randomised control trials of progestational
agents in pregnancy. British Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology 1989;96:265-74.
18.  Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Yaﬀe SJ. Drugs in Pregnancy and
Lactation. 9th edition. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2011.
19.  Alfirevic Z, Stampalija T, Roberts D, Jorgensen AL.
Cervical stitch (cerclage) for preventing preterm
birth in singleton pregnancy. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 4. Art. No: CD008991. [DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD008991.pub2]
20.  Bamigboye AA, Morris J. Oestrogen supplementation,
mainly diethylstilbestrol, for preventing miscarriages and
other adverse pregnancy outcomes. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2003, Issue 3. Art. No: CD004353. [DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD004353]
21.  Morley LC, Simpson N, Tang T. Human chorionic
gonadotrophin (hCG) for preventing miscarriage. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 1. Art. No:
CD008611. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008611.pub2]
22.  Porter TF, LaCoursiere Y, Scott JR. Immunotherapy
for recurrent miscarriage. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 2. Art. No: CD000112. [DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD000112.pub2]
23.  Rumbold A, Middleton P, Pan N, Crowther CA. Vitamin
supplementation for preventing miscarriage. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 1. Art. No:
CD004073. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004073.pub3]
24.  Wahabi HA, Fayed AA, Esmaeil SA, Bahkali KH. Progestogen
for treating threatened miscarriage. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2018, Issue 8. Art. No: CD005943. [DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD005943.pub5]
25.  Higgins JP, Lasserson T, Thomas J, Flemyng E, Churchill R.
Methodological Expectations of Cochrane Intervention Reviews.
Cochrane: London, Version August 2023.
26.  Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoﬀmann TC,
Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated
guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ 2021;71:372.
[DOI: 10.1136/bmj.n71]
27.  Haas DM, Hathaway TJ, Ramsey PS. Progestogen
for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent
miscarriage of unclear etiology. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2019, Issue 11. Art. No: CD003511. [DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD003511.pub5]
28.  Higgins JPT=, Altman DG, Sterne JA, editor(s). Chapter
8: Assessing risk of bias in included studies. In: Higgins JP,
Progestogen for preventing miscarriage in women with recurrent miscarriage of unclear etiology (Review)
Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
21