

[page 1]
591
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 11, No. 6, 2015
Sleep is essential for optimal health. The American Academy 
of Sleep Medicine (AASM) and Sleep Research Society (SRS) 
developed a consensus recommendation for the amount 
of sleep needed to promote optimal health in adults, using 
a modifi ed RAND Appropriateness Method process. The 
recommendation is summarized here. A manuscript detailing 
the conference proceedings and evidence supporting the fi nal 
recommendation statement will be published in SLEEP and 
the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine.
Citation: Watson NF, Badr MS, Belenky G, Bliwise DL, 
Buxton OM, Buysse D, Dinges DF, Gangwisch J, Grandner 
MA, Kushida C, Malhotra RK, Martin JL, Patel SR, Quan SF, 
Tasali E. Recommended amount of sleep for a healthy adult: 
a joint consensus statement of the American Academy of 
Sleep Medicine and Sleep Research Society. J Clin Sleep 
Med 2015;11(6):591–592.
pii: jc-0X231-15
http://dx.doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.4758 
CONSENSUS STATEMENT
• Adults should sleep 7 or more hours per night on a regular 
basis to promote optimal health.
• Sleeping less than 7 hours per night on a regular basis 
is associated with adverse health outcomes, including 
weight gain and obesity, diabetes, hypertension, heart 
disease and stroke, depression, and increased risk of 
death. Sleeping less than 7 hours per night is also asso-
ciated with impaired immune function, increased pain, 
impaired performance, increased errors, and greater 
risk of accidents.
• Sleeping more than 9 hours per night on a regular 
basis may be appropriate for young adults, individu-
als recovering from sleep debt, and individuals with 
illnesses. For others, it is uncertain whether sleeping 
more than 9 hours per night is associated with health 
risk.
• People concerned they are sleeping too little or too 
much should consult their healthcare provider.
Recommended Amount of Sleep for a Healthy Adult: A Joint 
Consensus Statement of the American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine and Sleep Research Society
Consensus Conference Panel: Nathaniel F. Watson, MD, MSc, Moderator1; M. Safwan Badr, MD2; Gregory Belenky, MD3; 
Donald L. Bliwise, PhD4; Orfeu M. Buxton, PhD5; Daniel Buysse, MD6; David F. Dinges, PhD7; James Gangwisch, PhD8; 
Michael A. Grandner, PhD, MSTR, CBSM7; Clete Kushida, MD, PhD9; Raman K. Malhotra, MD10; Jennifer L. Martin, PhD11; 
Sanjay R. Patel, MD, MSc12; Stuart F. Quan, MD12; Esra Tasali, MD13
Non-Participating Observers: Michael Twery, PhD14,*; Janet B. Croft, PhD15,*; Elise Maher, RPSGT16,*
American Academy of Sleep Medicine Staff: Jerome A. Barrett17; Sherene M. Thomas, PhD17; Jonathan L. Heald, MA17
1University of Washington, Seattle, WA; 2Wayne State University, Detroit, MI; 3Washington State University, Spokane, WA; 
4Emory University, Atlanta, GA; 5Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA; 6University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA; 
7University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; 8Columbia University, New York, NY; 9Stanford University, Stanford, CA; 10Saint 
Louis University, St. Louis, MO; 11University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA;12Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA; 13The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL; 14National Heart, Lung, Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD; 15Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA; 16Sleep Disorders Institute, New York, NY; 17American Academy of Sleep Medicine, Darien, 
IL; *attendance by these individuals does not constitute endorsement of this statement by their afﬁ liated institutions or organizations
METHODOLOGY
Healthy sleep requires adequate duration, good quality, ap-
propriate timing and regularity, and the absence of sleep dis-
turbances or disorders. Sleep duration is the most frequently 
investigated sleep measure in relation to health. Furthermore, 
the US Department of Health and Human Services created a 
Sleep Health Objective to “increase the proportion of adults 
who get suffi cient sleep” in Healthy People 2020, a federal ini-
tiative to improve the nation’s health.1 Thus our recommenda-
tion focuses on this sleep parameter. A panel of 15 experts in 
sleep medicine and research used a modifi ed RAND Appropri-
ateness Method2 to develop a recommendation regarding the 
sleep duration, or sleep duration range, that promotes optimal 
health in adults aged 18 to 60 years.
The expert panel reviewed published scientifi c evidence ad-
dressing the relationship between sleep duration and health, 
using a broad set of National Library of Medicine Medi-
cal Subject Headings (MeSH) terms and no date restrictions, 
which resulted in a total of 5,314 scientifi c articles. The process 
CONSENSUS STATEMENT

[page 2]
592
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 11, No. 6, 2015
NF Watson, MS Badr, G Belenky et al.
was further guided by the Oxford grading system.3 The panel 
focused on nine health categories with the best available evi-
dence in relation to sleep duration: general health, cardiovas-
cular health, metabolic health, mental health, immunologic 
function, human performance, cancer, pain, and mortality. 
Consistent with the RAND Appropriateness Method, multiple 
rounds of evidence review, discussion, and voting were con-
ducted to arrive at the final recommendation. The process to 
develop this statement was conducted over a 12-month period 
and concluded with a consensus meeting held in February 2015 
in Chicago, Illinois.
DISCUSSION & FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Current evidence supports the general recommendation for 
obtaining 7 or more hours of sleep per night on a regular basis 
to promote optimal health among adults aged 18 to 60 years. 
Individual variability in sleep need is influenced by genetic, 
behavioral, medical, and environmental factors. A clearer un-
derstanding of the precise biological mechanisms underlying 
sleep need continues to require further scientific investigation.
This recommendation creates a foundation to raise aware-
ness and improve understanding of sleep effects on health. The 
recommendation provides a basis for:
•	 Educating the public and healthcare providers on the im-
portance of adequate sleep duration for health.
•	 Encouraging individuals to obtain adequate sleep duration.
•	 Discussing the economic and social benefits of adequate 
sleep duration, thereby informing public policy.
•	 Promoting research on the role of sleep duration in health 
and well-being.
Research that directly examines the effects of sleep dura-
tion on health may lead to revisions of this recommendation 
in the future.
NOTES
This consensus statement was previously published in Vol-
ume 38, Number 6 of the journal SLEEP.4 In the interest of the 
widest dissemination possible, the editors and publishers of the 
journals SLEEP and Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine have 
agreed to allow for its dual publication.
REFERENCES
1.	 US Department of Health and Human Services. Sleep Health Objectives. 
March 6, 2015. Available from: https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-
objectives/topic/sleep-health/objectives.
2.	 Fitch K, Bernstein SJ, Aguilar MD, et al. The RAND/UCLA Appropriateness 
Method User’s Manual. Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2001.
3.	 OCEBM Levels of Evidence Working Group. The Oxford Levels of Evidence 
2. [cited February 9, 2015]. Available from: http://www.cebm.net/wp-content/
uploads/2014/06/CEBM-Levels-of-Evidence-2.1.pdf.
4.	 Watson NF, Badr MS, Belenky G, et al. Recommended amount of sleep for a 
healthy adult: a joint consensus statement of the American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine and Sleep Research Society. Sleep 2015;38:843–4.
SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION
Submitted for publication April, 2015
Accepted for publication April, 2015
Address correspondence to: Nathaniel F. Watson, MD, MSc; 2510 N. Frontage Road, 
Darien, IL 60561; Tel: (630) 737-9700; Fax: (630) 737-9790; Email: research@
aasmnet.org.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
Funding for this project was provided by the American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine and Sleep Research Society, and by the cooperative agreement number 
1U50DP004930-01 from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Its 
contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily repre-
sent the official views of the CDC.