

[page 1]
Red wine and resveratrol: Good
for your heart?
Resveratrol may be key to what could make red wine heart
healthy. Learn the facts and hype about red wine and how it
affects the heart.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Jan. 20, 2026
Red wine, in limited amounts, has long been thought of as healthy for the heart.
The alcohol and substances in red wine called antioxidants may help prevent
coronary artery disease. That condition can lead to heart attacks.
The link between red wine and fewer heart attacks isn't well understood. Some
small, older studies say antioxidants in red wine may raise levels of high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. That is the "good" cholesterol. It helps remove
other forms of cholesterol from the blood.
But there may be other reasons for the possible lower risk of heart disease in
people who drink limited amounts of red wine. And experts say you should not
start drinking alcohol to help your heart. This is especially true if you have alcohol
use disorder or if it runs in your family. Too much alcohol can be harmful in many
ways.
But if you already have a glass of red wine with your evening meal, drinking it in
limited amounts may improve your heart health.
Is red wine heart healthy?

[page 2]
Antioxidants in red wine called polyphenols may help protect the lining of blood
vessels in the heart. A polyphenol called resveratrol is one part of red wine that's
gotten noticed for being healthy.
Resveratrol in red wine
Resveratrol might help prevent damage to blood vessels and prevent blood clots.
It may lower low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. That is the "bad"
cholesterol.
But study results on resveratrol are mixed.
Some research shows that resveratrol may make you less likely to get blood clots
and swelling and irritation, called inflammation. This can lower the risk of heart
disease.
But other studies have found that resveratrol does not protect against heart
disease. More research is needed.
Resveratrol in grapes, supplements and other
foods
The resveratrol in red wine comes from the skin of grapes used to make wine.
Simply eating grapes or drinking grape juice is a way to get resveratrol without
drinking alcohol. Red and purple grape juices may have some of the same heart-
healthy benefits as red wine.
Peanuts, blueberries and cranberries also have some resveratrol. It's not yet
known whether it is resveratrol or other compounds in grapes or other foods that
promote heart health. And it's not known how much resveratrol is needed to
protect the heart. The amount of resveratrol in food and red wine can vary widely.
There also are resveratrol supplements. However, they might cause side effects.
And research suggests that the body can't absorb most of the resveratrol in
supplements.

[page 3]
How might alcohol help the heart?
Many studies have shown that drinking regular, limited amounts of any type of
alcohol helps the heart. It's not just red wine. Research suggests that alcohol:
Raises HDL cholesterol, also called the "good" cholesterol.
Helps prevent blood clots.
Helps prevent artery damage from high levels of LDL cholesterol, also called
the "bad" cholesterol.
May make the layer of cells that line the blood vessels work better.
Drink in moderation or not at all
Researchers continue to study whether red wine and other types of alcohol can
help the heart. Overall, research suggests that those who drink regular, limited
amounts of alcohol, including red wine, seem to have no added risk or maybe a
lower risk of:
A common type of heart disease called coronary artery disease.
Stroke.
Sudden death.
Possibly heart failure.
It's still not clear how this amount of drinking may affect the risk of atrial
fibrillation. That is an irregular and often very fast heart rhythm.
Drinking regular, limited amounts of alcohol is called drinking in moderation.
Still, the possible lower risk of heart disease in people who drink red wine in
moderation may be linked with some other factors. For instance, these people
might eat healthier diets and be more active than those who don't drink red wine.
And they might have better access to healthcare as well.
More research is needed about whether red wine is better for the heart than
other types of alcohol, such as beer or hard liquor.
The American Heart Association and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute say you should not start to drink alcohol just to prevent heart disease.

[page 4]
Some people who drink alcohol have trouble stopping, called addiction. And
drinking alcohol can cause other health conditions or make them worse.
Drinking too much alcohol increases the risk of:
Accidents, violence and suicide.
Some types of cancer.
Heart failure.
Irregular heartbeats such as atrial fibrillation, which can lead to stroke.
High blood pressure.
Liver and pancreas diseases.
Stroke.
Weight gain and obesity.
Do not drink alcohol at all if you:
Are pregnant, think you might be pregnant or are trying to become pregnant.
Have a personal or strong family history of alcohol use disorder.
Have liver disease.
Have pancreas disease linked to alcohol use.
Have heart failure or a weak heart.
Take medicines that don't mix well with alcohol.
Are breastfeeding, especially within two hours of drinking alcohol.
If you have questions about the benefits and risks of alcohol, talk with your
healthcare professional.
If you choose to drink alcohol, limit how often you drink and keep the amount
small. That often means less than two drinks a day on any specific day.
Keep in mind that all types of heavy drinking are linked to worse heart health.
That includes binge drinking, which means having four or more drinks for women,
or five or more drinks for men, within about two hours.
1. Tangney CC, et al. Cardiovascular benefits and risks of moderate alcohol consumption.
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed June 15, 2023.
2. Mukamal KJ. Overview of the risks and benefits of alcohol consumption.
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed June 15, 2023.
3. Libby P, et al., eds. Cardiomyopathies induced by drugs or toxins. In: Braunwald's Heart Disease: A
Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 12th ed. Elsevier; 2022. https://www.clinicalkey.com.

[page 5]
Accessed June 15, 2023.
4. Rethinking drinking: Alcohol and your health. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
https://www.rethinkingdrinking.niaaa.nih.gov. Accessed June 15, 2023.
5. 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
and U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov. Accessed June 15, 2023.
6. Scientific Report of the 2020 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee. Alcoholic beverages. U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture.
https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/2020-advisory-committee-report. Accessed June 15, 2023.
7. Is drinking alcohol part of a healthy lifestyle? American Heart Association.
https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-eating/eat-smart/nutrition-basics/alcohol-and-
heart-health. Accessed June 15, 2023.
8. Drinking red wine for heart health? Read this before you toast. American Heart Association.
https://www.heart.org/en/news/2019/05/24/drinking-red-wine-for-heart-health-read-this-
before-you-toast. Accessed June 15, 2023.
9. Krittanawong C, et al. Alcohol consumption and cardiovascular health. The American Journal of
Medicine. 2022; doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2022.04.021.
10. Medical review (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic. Sept. 5, 2025.
11. Piano MR, et al. Alcohol use and cardiovascular disease: A scientific statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation. 2025; doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000001341.
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Notice of Nondiscrimination
Digital Accessibility Statement
Advertising & Sponsorship Policy
Site Map
© 1998-2026 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER).
All rights reserved.

[page 6]
ART-20048281