

[page 1]
Red yeast rice
By Mayo Clinic Staff
March 27, 2025
Overview
Red yeast rice is the product of the fungus Monascus purpureus grown on rice.
Red yeast rice is available in a powdered form that you can eat. It's also used in
traditional Chinese medicine or sold as a supplement taken by mouth.
Red yeast rice has compounds in it that appear to lower cholesterol. One of the
compounds is monacolin K. This compound has the same chemical structure as
the prescription cholesterol-lowering medicine lovastatin (Altoprev).
Some people take red yeast rice as a supplement to try to lower cholesterol and
improve their heart health.
What the research says
Research on red yeast rice use for specific conditions shows:
High cholesterol. Research shows that red yeast rice that has a large amount
of the compound monacolin K in it can lower total cholesterol. The
supplement also may lower low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, also called
LDL cholesterol. This is the "bad" cholesterol found in the blood that can
raise your risk of heart disease.

[page 2]
Our take
Red yeast rice can lower blood cholesterol. While the supplement is generally
considered safe, it has the same potential side effects as prescription statin
medicines used to treat high cholesterol.
Red yeast rice supplements are available without a prescription. But there's less
of a guarantee about what's in a red yeast rice supplement compared with a
statin. Some red yeast products might have only small amounts of monacolin K in
them and might have little effect on cholesterol.
Safety and side effects
Red yeast rice can cause mild side effects, including:
Stomach pain.
Heartburn.
Gas.
Headache.
Feeling dizzy.
Upset stomach.
The monacolin K in red yeast rice has the same chemical structure as the
prescription cholesterol-lowering medicine lovastatin. The supplement and man-
made medicine can have similar side effects that are more serious. These may
include liver, muscle and kidney issues.
Don't take red yeast rice if you're pregnant, trying to become pregnant or
breastfeeding.
Red yeast rice supplements also could have citrinin in them. Citrinin is a toxin that
can harm the kidneys. An analysis of 37 red yeast rice supplements found that
only one had citrinin at safe levels.
Caution

[page 3]
Interactions
Some medicines, supplements, and substances may not work well with red yeast
rice. These include:
Alcohol. Don't drink alcohol if you are taking red yeast rice. The combination
might increase the risk of liver damage.
Cyclosporine (Neoral, Sandimmune). This medicine suppresses the immune
system. Taking it with red yeast rice might raise the risk of muscle issues.
Cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors. Taking red yeast rice with medicines that
slow down or stop the CYP3A4 enzyme might raise the risk of harmful side
effects from red yeast rice. These medicines include erythromycin.
Grapefruit. Drinking grapefruit juice and taking red yeast rice might raise the
risk of the supplement's harmful side effects.
Gemfibrozil (Lopid). Taking this cholesterol medicine with red yeast rice
might raise the risk of muscle issues.
Hepatotoxic medicines, herbs and supplements. Red yeast rice may have
monacolin K in it, which can cause liver damage in some people. Taking red
yeast rice with these types of medicines, herbs and supplements could raise
the risk of liver damage.
Niacin. Taking red yeast rice with high-dose niacin might raise the risk of
muscle issues.
St. John's wort. Taking this supplement with red yeast rice might lessen how
well the red yeast rice works.
Statins. Taking red yeast rice with statins might raise the risk of harmful side
effects.
1. Red yeast rice: What you need to know. National Center for Complementary and Integrative
Health. https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/red-yeast-rice. Accessed Jan. 11, 2025.
2. Banach, M, et al. Rhabdomyolysis or severe acute hepatitis associated with the use of red yeast
rice extracts: An update from the adverse event reporting systems. Current Atherosclerosis
Reports. 2023; doi:10.1007/s11883-023-01157-4.
3. Red yeast rice. NatMed. https://naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com. Accessed Jan. 12,
2025.
4. Katzung BG, et al., eds. Agents used in dyslipidemia. In: Basic & Clinical Pharmacology. 15th ed.

[page 4]
McGraw Hill; 2021. https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com. Accessed Jan. 11, 2025.
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Notice of Nondiscrimination
Digital Accessibility Statement
Advertising & Sponsorship Policy
Site Map
© 1998-2026 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER).
All rights reserved.
ART-20363074