

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Reducing free sugars
intake in children to
reduce the risk of
noncommunicable
diseases
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) are the world’s leading cause of death: they were
responsible for an estimated 41 million (73%) of the 56 million deaths in 2017. Many of
those deaths were premature (i.e. under the age of 70 years) and occurred in low- and
middle-income countries. Modifiable risk factors such as unhealthy diet and physical
inactivity are some of the most common causes of NCDs, including obesity.

[page 2]
Overweight and obese children are at higher risk of developing serious health problems
including type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, asthma and other respiratory problems,
sleep disorders and liver disease. They may also suffer from psychological effects, such
as low self-esteem, depression and social isolation. Childhood obesity also increases the
risk of obesity, NCDs, premature death and disability in adulthood.
Dental caries causes pain, anxiety, functional limitation (including poor school
attendance and performance in children) and social handicap through tooth loss. The
negative health effects of dental caries are cumulative, tracking from childhood to
adulthood and most dental caries is now occurring in adults.
Free sugars* contribute to the overall energy density of diets and higher intakes of free
sugars threaten the nutrient quality of the diet by providing significant energy without
specific nutrients, leading to unhealthy weight gain and increased risk of obesity and
various NCDs, particularly dental caries which is the most prevalent NCD globally.
* Free sugars include monosaccharides and disaccharides added to foods and
beverages by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, and sugars naturally present in
honey, syrups, fruit juices and fruit juice concentrates.
WHO Recommendations
WHO recommends a reduced intake of free sugars throughout the lifecourse.
In both adults and children, WHO recommends reducing the intake of free sugars to
less than 10% of total energy intake.
WHO suggests a further reduction of the intake of free sugars to below 5% of total
energy intake.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: sugars intake for adults and children
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint
WHO/FAO expert consultation
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effect on caries of restricting sugars intake: systematic review to inform WHO guidelines
Moynihan PJ, Kelly SA. Journal of Dental Research. 2014; 93(1):8-18.
Dietary sugars and body weight: systematic review and meta-analyses of randomised
controlled trials and cohort studies
Te Morenga L, Mallard S, Mann J. BMJ. 2013; 346:e7492.
Related systematic reviews
Evidence-based guideline of the German Nutrition Society: carbohydrate intake and
prevention of nutrition-related diseases
Hauner H, Bechthold A, Boeing H, Brönstrup A, Buyken A, Leschik-Bonnet E, et al. Ann Nutr Metab. 2012;60
Suppl 1:1-58.
Dietary sugars and cardiometabolic risk: systematic review and meta-analyses of randomized
controlled trials of the effects on blood pressure and lipids
Te Morenga LA, Howatson AJ, Jones RM, Mann J. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;100(1):65-79.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO