

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Reducing sodium
intake to control blood
pressure in children
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the leading cause of death globally. An estimated
17.8 million people died from CVDs in 2017, representing approximately 32% of all
deaths worldwide. High blood pressure (hypertension) is a major risk for CVDs. Children
with elevated blood pressure are at high risk of CVD pathology during childhood, and
are also at high risk for hypertension and CVDs as adults.
Evidence shows that reducing sodium intake significantly reduces blood pressure in
adults and children. Sodium is found not only in table salt, but also naturally in a variety
of foods, including milk, cream, eggs, meat and shellfish. It is also found in much high

[page 2]
amounts in processed foods, such as breads, crackers, processed meats like bacon and
snack foods such as pretzels, cheese puffs and popcorn, as well as in condiments such
as soy sauce, fish sauce, and bouillon or stock cubes.
WHO Recommendations
WHO recommends a reduction in sodium intake to control blood pressure in children
aged 2–15 years.
The recommended maximum level of intake of 2 g/day sodium in adults should be
adjusted downward based on the energy requirements of children relative to those of
adults.
*************
These recommendations recognize that salt reduction and salt iodization are
compatible. Monitoring of salt intake and salt iodization at country level is needed so
that salt iodization can be adjusted over time as necessary, depending on observed salt
intake in the population, to ensure that individuals consuming the recommended
amount of sodium will continue to consume sufficient iodine.
These recommendations complement the WHO guideline on potassium consumption
and should not be interpreted to replace or supersede that guideline. Public health
interventions should aim to reduce sodium intake and simultaneously increase
potassium intake through foods. Additional information can be found in the guidance
summary, and in the guideline under 'WHO documents' below.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: sodium intake for adults and children
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Prevention of cardiovascular disease : guidelines for assessment and
management of total cardiovascular risk
Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint
WHO/FAO expert consultation
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effect of reduced sodium intake on blood pressure, renal function, blood lipids and other
potential adverse effects
Aburto NJ, Das S. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
Effect of reduced sodium intake on blood pressures and potential adverse effects in children
Aburto NJ, Ziolkovska A. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
Effect of lower sodium intake on health: systematic review and meta-analyses
Aburto NJ, Ziolkovska A, Hooper L, Elliott P, Cappuccio FP, Meerpohl JJ. BMJ. 2013;346:f1326.
Related Cochrane reviews

[page 4]
Effects of low sodium diet versus high sodium diet on blood pressure, renin, aldosterone,
catecholamines, cholesterol, and triglyceride
Graudal NA, Hubeck-Graudal T, Jurgens G.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 4. Art. No.:
CD004022.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 5]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO