

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Reducing sodium
intake to reduce blood
pressure and risk of
cardiovascular diseases
in adults
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the leading cause of death globally. An estimated
17.8 million people died from CVDs in 2017, representing approximately 32% of all
deaths worldwide. High blood pressure (hypertension) is a major risk for CVDs,
especially heart attack and stroke.
Evidence shows that reducing sodium intake significantly reduces blood pressure in
adults. Sodium is found not only in table salt, but also naturally in a variety of foods,

[page 2]
including milk, cream, eggs, meat and shellfish. It is also found in much high amounts
in processed foods, such as breads, crackers, processed meats like bacon and snack
foods such as pretzels, cheese puffs and popcorn, as well as in condiments such as soy
sauce, fish sauce, and bouillon or stock cubes.
WHO Recommendations
WHO recommends a reduction in sodium intake to reduce blood pressure and risk of
cardiovascular disease, stroke and coronary heart disease in adults.
WHO recommends a reduction to <2 g/day sodium (5 g/day salt) in adults.
*************
These recommendations recognize that salt reduction and salt iodization are
compatible. Monitoring of salt intake and salt iodization at country level is needed so
that salt iodization can be adjusted over time as necessary, depending on observed salt
intake in the population, to ensure that individuals consuming the recommended
amount of sodium will continue to consume sufficient iodine.
These recommendations complement the WHO guideline on potassium consumption
and should not be interpreted to replace or supersede that guideline. Public health
interventions should aim to reduce sodium intake and simultaneously increase
potassium intake through foods. Additional information can be found in the guidance
summary, and in the guideline under 'WHO documents' below.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: sodium intake for adults and children
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Prevention of cardiovascular disease : guidelines for assessment and
management of total cardiovascular risk
Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint
WHO/FAO expert consultation
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effect of reduced sodium intake on blood pressures and potential adverse effects in children
Aburto NJ, Ziolkovska A. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
Effect of lower sodium intake on health: systematic review and meta-analyses
Aburto NJ, Ziolkovska A, Hooper L, Elliott P, Cappuccio FP, Meerpohl JJ. BMJ. 2013, 346:f1326.
Effect of reduced sodium intake on blood pressure, renal function, blood lipids and other
potential adverse effects
Aburto NJ, Das S. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
Related Cochrane reviews
Effect of longer-term modest salt reduction on blood pressure
He FJ, Li J, MacGregor GA. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2013; Issue 4. Art. No.: CD004937.
Summary of this review 
Effects of low sodium diet versus high sodium diet on blood pressure, renin, aldosterone,
catecholamines, cholesterol, and triglyceride

[page 4]
Graudal NA, Hubeck-Graudal T, Jurgens G.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 4. Art. No.:
CD004022.
Summary of this review 
Reduced dietary salt for the prevention of cardiovascular disease
Adler AJ, Taylor F, Martin N, Gottlieb S, Taylor RS, Ebrahim S. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2014; Issue 12. Art. No.: CD009217.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Lifestyle interventions to reduce raised blood pressure: a systematic review of randomized
controlled trials
Dickinson HO, Mason JM, Nicolson DJ, Campbell F, Beyer FR, Cook JV et al. J Hypertens. 2006;24(2):215-33.
Salt intake, stroke, and cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of prospective studies
Strazzullo P, D'Elia L, Kandala NB, Cappuccio FP. BMJ. 2009;339:b4567.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
A cost effectiveness analysis of salt reduction policies to reduce coronary heart disease in four
Eastern Mediterranean countries
Mason H, Shoaibi A, Ghandour R, O'Flaherty M, Capewell S, Khatib R, et al. PLoS One. 2014; 9(1):e84445.
Cost-effectiveness of interventions to reduce dietary salt intake
Cobiac LJ, Vos T, Veerman JL. Heart. 2010; 96(23):1920-5.
Cost and cost-effectiveness of a school-based education program to reduce salt intake in
children and their families in China
Li X, Jan S, Yan LL, Hayes A, Chu Y, Wang H, et al. PLoS One. 2017; 12(9):e0183033.
Cost-effectiveness analysis of salt reduction policies to reduce coronary heart disease in Syria,
2010-2020

[page 5]
Wilcox ML, Mason H, Fouad FM, Rastam S, al Ali R, Page TF, et al. Int J Public Health. 2015; 60 Suppl 1:S23-
30.
Taxes and Subsidies for Improving Diet and Population Health in Australia: A Cost-
Effectiveness Modelling Study
Cobiac LJ, Tam K, Veerman L, Blakely T. PLoS Med. 2017; 14(2):e1002232.
Cost effectiveness of a government supported policy strategy to decrease sodium intake:
global analysis across 183 nations
Webb M, Fahimi S, Singh GM, Khatibzadeh S, Micha R, Powles J, Mozaffarian D. BMJ. 2017; 356:i6699.
Health economic consequences of reducing salt intake and replacing saturated fat with
polyunsaturated fat in the adult Finnish population: estimates based on the FINRISK and
FINDIET studies
Martikainen JA, Soini EJ, Laaksonen DE, Niskanen L. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2011; 65(10):1148-55.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters

[page 6]
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO