

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Reducing consumption
of sugar-sweetened
beverages to reduce
the risk of unhealthy
weight gain in adults
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Overweight and obesity are major risk factors for a number of noncommunicable
diseases, including diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and certain types of cancer. Once
considered a problem only in high income countries, overweight and obesity are now
dramatically on the rise in low- and middle-income countries, particularly in urban
settings.

[page 2]
Sugar-sweetened beverage consumption is high in many parts of the world and is
suggestive of poor dietary quality, as sugar-sweetened beverages contain sugars such
as sucrose or fructose, often in large amounts, which contribute to the overall energy
density of diets. The calories provided by sugar-sweetened beverages have little
nutritional value and may not provide the same feeling of fullness that solid food
provides. As a result, total energy intake may increase which can lead to unhealthy
weight gain.
WHO has developed guidance on free sugars* intake, as shown below, based on the
impact of free sugars intake on weight gain and dental caries. Current evidence
suggests that increasing consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages is associated with
weight gain. Therefore, reducing consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages would
also reduce the risk of unhealthy weight gain in adults.
* Free sugars include monosaccharides and disaccharides added to foods and
beverages by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, and sugars naturally present in
honey, syrups, fruit juices and fruit juice concentrates.
WHO Recommendations
WHO recommends a reduced intake of free sugars throughout the lifecourse.
In both adults and children, WHO recommends reducing the intake of free sugars to
less than 10% of total energy intake.
WHO suggests a further reduction of the intake of free sugars to below 5% of total
energy intake.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: sugars intake for adults and children
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint
WHO/FAO expert consultation
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Effect on caries of restricting sugars intake: systematic review to inform WHO guidelines
Moynihan PJ, Kelly SA. Journal of Dental Research. 2014; 93(1):8-18.
Dietary sugars and body weight: systematic review and meta-analyses of randomised
controlled trials and cohort studies
Te Morenga L, Mallard S, Mann J. BMJ. 2013; 346:e7492.
Related systematic reviews
Nutritively sweetened beverage consumption and body weight: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized experiments
Mattes RD, Shikany JM, Kaiser KA, Allison DB. Obesity Reviews. 2011; 12(5):346-65.
Sugar-sweetened beverages and weight gain in children and adults: a systematic review and
meta-analysis
Malik VS, Pan A, Willett WC, Hu FB. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2013; 98(4):1084-1102.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The impact of a tax on sugar-sweetened beverages on health and health care costs: a
modelling study
Veerman JL, Sacks G, Antonopoulos N, Martin J. PLoS One. 2016; 11(4):e0151460.

[page 4]
Modelled cost-effectiveness of a package size cap and a kilojoule reduction intervention to
reduce energy intake from sugar-sweetened beverages in Australia
Crino M, Herrera AMM, Ananthapavan J, Wu JHY, Neal B, Lee YY, et al. Nutrients. 2017; 9(9).
Cost Eeffectiveness of a sugar-sweetened beverage excise tax in the U.S.
Long MW, Gortmaker SL, Ward ZJ, Resch SC, Moodie ML, Sacks G, et al. Am J Prev Med. 2015; 49(1):112-23.
Modelled health benefits of a sugar-sweetened beverage tax across different socioeconomic
groups in Australia: A cost-effectiveness and equity analysis
Lal A, Mantilla-Herrera AM, Veerman L, Backholer K, Sacks G, Moodie M, et al. PLoS Med. 2017;
14(6):e1002326.
Taxes and subsidies for improving diet and population health in Australia: a cost-effectiveness
modelling study
Cobiac LJ, Tam K, Veerman L, Blakely T. PLoS Med. 2017; 14(2):e1002232.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Reducing consumption of sugar-
sweetened beverages to reduce the
risk of unhealthy weight gain in
adults
Reducing consumption of sugar-
sweetened beverages to reduce the
Category 2 intervention
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Commentary

[page 5]
risk of unhealthy weight gain in
adults
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO