

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Reducing the impact of
marketing of foods and
non-alcoholic
beverages on children
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Advertising and other forms of food and beverage marketing to children are
widespread across the world and are influencing children’s food preferences, purchase
requests and consumption patterns. A significant amount of this marketing is for
products with a high content of fat, sugars or salt, consumption of which may increase
the risk of overweight, obesity or certain noncommunicable diseases.
Overweight and obese children are at higher risk of developing serious health problems
including type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, asthma and other respiratory problems,

[page 2]
sleep disorders and liver disease. They may also suffer from psychological effects, such
as low self-esteem, depression and social isolation. Childhood obesity also increases the
risk of obesity, noncommunicable diseases, premature death and disability in
adulthood.
WHO Recommendations
WHO has developed a set of 12 recommendations, endorsed by the World Health
Assembly, aimed at reducing the impact of marketing foods high in saturated fats,
trans-fatty acids, free sugars or salt.
The recommendations can be found in the guidance document, Set of recommendations
on the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children below
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
A framework for implementing the set of recommendations on the
marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children
Set of recommendations on the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic
beverages to children
World Health Assembly resolution WHA63.14: Marketing of food and
non-alcoholic beverages to children
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Evidence
Related systematic reviews
Influence of unhealthy food and beverage marketing on children’s dietary intake and
preference: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials
Sadeghirad B, Duhaney T, Motaghipisheh S, Campbell NR, Johnston BC Obesity Reviews. 2016;17:945–959.
The influence of the food environment on overweight and obesity in young children: a
systematic review
Osei-Assibey G, Dick S, Macdiarmid J, Semple S, Reilly JJ, Ellaway A et al. BMJ Open. 2012;2:e001538.
Advertising as a cue to consume: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of acute
exposure to unhealthy food and nonalcoholic beverage advertising on intake in children and
adults
Boyland EJ, Nolan S, Kelly B, Tudur-Smith C, Jones A, Halford JC, Robinson E. Am J Clin Nutr.
2016;103(2):519-33.
The extent, nature and effects of food promotion to children: a review of the evidence to
December 2008
Cairns G, Angus K, Hastings G. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
BMI and Healthcare Cost Impact of Eliminating Tax Subsidy for Advertising Unhealthy Food to
Youth
Sonneville KR, Long MW, Ward ZJ, Resch SC, Wang YC, Pomeranz JL, et al. Am J Prev Med. 2015; 49(1):124-
34.
The Potential Cost-Effectiveness and Equity Impacts of Restricting Television Advertising of
Unhealthy Food and Beverages to Australian Children
Brown V, Ananthapavan J, Veerman L, Sacks G, Lal A, Peeters A, et al. Nutrients. 2018; 10(5).

[page 4]
The cost-effectiveness of removing television advertising of high-fat and/or high-sugar food
and beverages to Australian children
Magnus A, Haby MM, Carter R, Swinburn B. Int J Obes (Lond). 2009; 33(10):1094-102.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO