

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Regulation of
marketing breast-milk
substitutes
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
The International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes is a set of
recommendations to regulate the marketing of breast-milk substitutes, feeding bottles
and teats. The Code aims to contribute "to the provision of safe and adequate nutrition
for infants, by the protection and promotion of breastfeeding, and by ensuring the
proper use of breast-milk substitutes, when these are necessary, on the basis of
adequate information and through appropriate marketing and distribution".
The Code was formulated in response to the realization that poor infant feeding
practices were negatively affecting the growth, health and development of children, and

[page 2]
were a major cause of mortality in infants and young children. The Code is
complemented by a series of subsequent resolutions that further clarify and define its
provisions.
The Code advocates that infants be breastfed. If they are not breastfed the Code also
advocates that infants be fed safely on the best available nutritional alternative. Breast-
milk substitutes should be available when needed, but not be promoted.
Implementation of the Code is the responsibility of governments, who can adopt
legislation, regulations or measures such as national policies. Cooperation from food
manufacturers and distributors, health-care professionals, nongovernmental
organizations and consumer organizations is essential in implementation of the Code
and in protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding.
WHO Recommendations
One of the nine operational targets of the Global Strategy for Infant and Young Child
Feeding is to take action to give effect to the International Code of Marketing of Breast-
milk Substitutes and subsequent relevant resolutions of the World Health Assembly.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidance on ending the inappropriate promotion of foods for infants
and young children: implementation manual
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
International Code of Marketing of Breast-Milk Substitutes
Evidence
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Recommendations or other forms of
guidance have been adopted or
endorsed by the World Health
Assembly
This is an Essential Nutrition Action
targeting the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 4]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO