

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Restricting caffeine
intake during
pregnancy
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Caffeine is a stimulant found in tea, coffee, soft drinks, chocolate, kola nuts, energy
drinks and some over-the-counter medications. Coffee is one of the most common
sources of high caffeine intake. During pregnancy, caffeine clearance from the mother’s
blood slows down significantly. Results from some observational studies suggest that
excess intake of caffeine may be associated with growth restriction, reduced birth
weight, preterm birth or stillbirth.
WHO Recommendations

[page 2]
For pregnant women with high daily caffeine intake (more than 300 mg per day),
lowering daily caffeine intake during pregnancy is recommended to reduce the risk of
pregnancy loss and low birth weight neonates.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy
experience
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
A meta-analysis of risk of pregnancy loss and caffeine and coffee consumption during
pregnancy
Li J, Zhao H, Song JM, Zhang J, Tang YL, Xin CM. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2015;130(2):116-22.
Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy and risk of pregnancy loss: a categorical and dose-
response meta-analysis of prospective studies
Chen LW, Wu Y, Neelakantan N, Chong MF, Pan A, van Dam RM. Public Health Nutr. 2016;19(7):1233-44.
Effects of restricted caffeine intake by mother on fetal, neonatal and pregnancy outcomes
Jahanfar S, Jaafar SH.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 6. Art. No.: CD006965.
Summary of this review 
Maternal caffeine consumption during pregnancy and risk of low birth weight: a dose-
response meta-analysis of observational studies
Rhee J, Kim R, Kim Y, Tam M, Lai Y, Keum N, et al. PLoS ONE. 2015;10(7): e0132334.

[page 3]
Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy is associated with risk of low birth weight: a
systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis
Chen LW, Wu Y, Neelakantan N, Chong MF, Pan A, van Dam RM. BMC Med. 2014;12:174.
Learn More 
Cost-effectivenеss
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 4]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO