

[page 1]
Rumors, Myths, and Truths
We've all seen them: Facebook posts, viral emails, and blog posts that make frightening claims
about cancer risk from suprising sources. There are far too many to address here, but we've
listed a few of the most common. You can also see the "What Causes Cancer" page for several
other commonly talked about potential risks, from cell phone towers to water fluroridation.
We would be remiss if we did not mention snopes.com as a leading source for reliable
information about misinformation on social media. 
Plastic Water Bottles 
A viral message says plastic water bottles contain diethylhexyl adipate (DEHA), which it calls a
potential carcinogen, quoting an unidentified doctor as saying women should not drink
bottled water that has been left in a car because the heat and the plastic of the bottle have
certain chemicals that can lead to breast cancer.
Microwaving Plastic
One email quotes information allegedly contained in a newsletter from Johns Hopkins
University, adding that the "information is being circulated at Walter Reed Army Medical
Center." Some also quote "Dr. Fujimoto from Castle Hospital" as warning that heating plastic
in the microwave or freezing water in plastic bottles releases toxins, like dioxin and DEHA.
Bras and Breast Cancer
The claimed cancer risk posed by bras and is one of several unproven or controversial risk
factors that are frequently  linked to breast cancer. Others include abortion, antiperspirants,
and breast implants. See this page for more.
Cosmetics and Cancer
While there is little evidence to suggest that cosmetics increase cancer risk, there are also no
long-term studies on the issue. Read more on this page to learn what we know and what we
still do not.
Chemotherapy Doesn't Work
As discussed on snopes.com: "In June 2016 several alternative health and conspiracy blogs
published posts claiming that a Berkeley doctor had recently 'blown the whistle” on
chemotherapy as a treatment for cancer, revealing that it doesn’t work 97% of the time and
is only recommended due to practitioner greed...'" Snopes labels the claim as "False." You can
read more on their site.
One of the most widely-spread viral emails we've ever seen has found new life on Facebook. It
reprints a poem, called Slow Dance, supposedly written by a terminally ill young girl in New
York.
A Poem that Raises Money for ACS

[page 2]
This long-running email claims women should tell all their female friends to insist on a CA-125
blood test every year to look for ovarian cancer. In fact, checking CA-125 levels has not been
found...
American Cancer Society guidelines actually recommend a mostly plant-based diet as well as
limiting the consumption of processed and red meat.





CA-125 to Screen for Ovarian Cancer
Does the American Cancer Society Promote Meat?