

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Standard formula for
low-birth-weight
infants following
hospital discharge
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Every year, more than 20 million infants are born weighing less than 2.5kg – over 96% of
them in developing countries. These low-birth-weight (LBW) infants are at increased risk
of early growth retardation, infectious disease, developmental delay and death during
infancy and childhood.
Most LBW is a consequence of preterm birth, small size for gestational age, or both.

[page 2]
Interventions to improve the feeding of LBW infants are likely to improve the immediate
and longer-term health and well-being of the individual infant and have a significant
impact on neonatal and infant mortality levels in the population.
WHO recommends that LBW infants should be fed mother's own milk. If these infants
cannot be fed mother's own milk, they should be fed donor human milk (in settings
where safe and affordable milk banking facilities are available or can be set up) or
standard infant formula.
LBW infants are often small for their age when they are discharged from hospital. It has
been suggested that feeding these infants with a nutrient-enriched formula rather than
standard term formula might facilitate "catch-up" growth and improve development;
however there is no consistent evidence to suggest that this is the case. Furthermore,
the cost of nutrient-enriched infant formula is high and its availability in resource-
limited settings is low.
WHO Recommendations
LBW infants, including those with very low birth weight (VLBW), who cannot be fed
mother's own milk or donor human milk should be fed standard infant formula.
LBW infants, including those with VLBW, who cannot be fed mother's own milk or donor
human milk should be fed standard infant formula from the time of discharge until six
months of age.
These recommendations are relevant for resource-limited settings.
These recommendations do not address sick LBW infants or infants with birth
weight less than 1.0 kg.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents

[page 3]
Guidelines on optimal feeding of low birth-weight infants in low- and
middle-income countries
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Optimal feeding of low-birth-weight infants: technical review
Edmond K, Bahl R. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006.
Related Cochrane reviews
Nutrient-enriched formula versus standard formula for preterm infants following hospital
discharge
Young L, Embleton ND, McGuire W.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 12. Art. No.:
CD004696.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention

[page 4]
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO