

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Supplemental nutrition
with dietary advice for
older people affected
by undernutrition
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In most regions over the past 50 years, socioeconomic development has been
accompanied by large drops in fertility and equally dramatic rises in life expectancy.
This phenomenon has led to rapidly ageing populations around the world.
Ageing is accompanied by physiological changes that can have a negative impact on
nutritional status and intrinsic capacity*. After 60 years of age, there is a progressive
decrease in body weight that results mainly from a decrease in fat-free mass and lean
mass, and an increase in fat mass. Sensory impairments (a decreased sense of taste

[page 2]
and smell, for example), poor oral health, isolation, loneliness and depression –
individually or in combination – all increase the risk of undernutrition in older age.
Older people who are affected by undernutrition and vitamin and mineral deficiencies
are more vulnerable to infections and are at increased risk of poor health, including the
development of sarcopenia and osteoporosis.
Current evidence suggests that oral supplemental nutrition** plus dietary advice may
improve nutritional status in older people affected by undernutrition.
* Intrinsic capacity is defined by the WHO guideline as the combination of the
individual’s physical and mental, including psychological, capacities
** Oral supplemental nutrition is defined by the WHO guideline as the provision of
additional high-quality protein, calories and adequate amounts of vitamins and
minerals tailored to the individual’s needs assessed by a trained health care
professional.
WHO Recommendations
Oral supplemental nutrition with dietary advice should be recommended for older
people affected by undernutrition.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Integrated care for older people: guidelines on community-level
interventions to manage declines in intrinsic capacity
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Dietary advice with or without oral nutritional supplements for disease-related malnutrition in
adults
Baldwin C, Weekes CE.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD002008.

[page 3]
Summary of this review 
Protein and energy supplementation in elderly people at risk from malnutrition
Milne AC, Potter J, Vivanti A, Avenell A.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2009, Issue 2. Art. No.:
CD003288.
Summary of this review 
Individualised dietary counselling for nutritionally at-risk older patients following discharge
from acute hospital to home: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Munk T, Tolstrup U, Beck AM, Holst M, Rasmussen HH, Hovhannisyan K, Thomsen T. Journal of Human
Nutrition and Dietetics. 2016;29:196–208.
Other related systematic reviews
Risk Factors for Malnutrition in Older Adults: A Systematic Review of the Literature Based on
Longitudinal Data
Fávaro-Moreira NC, Krausch-Hofmann S, Matthys C, Vereecken C, Vanhauwaert E, et al. Advances in
Nutrition. 2016;7(3):507-22.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Oral nutritional support in malnourished elderly decreases functional limitations with no extra
costs
Neelemaat F, Bosmans JE, Thijs A, Seidell JC, van Bokhorst-de van der Schueren MA. Clin Nutr. 2012;
31(2):183-90.
Cost-effectiveness of nutrition interventions in nursing home residents: a pilot intervention
Simmons SF, Zhuo X, Keeler E. J Nutr Health Aging. 2010; 14(5):367-72.
Cost-effectiveness of oral nutritional supplements in older malnourished care home residents
Elia M, Parsons EL, Cawood AL, Smith TR, Stratton RJ. Clin Nutr. 2018; 37(2):651-658.
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO