

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Supplementary feeding
in community settings
for promoting child
growth
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Undernutrition is a major underlying cause of child morbidity and mortality in low-
income settings. The WHO Child Growth Standards show how children should grow if
they are given an optimum start in life. They are used for monitoring the well-being of
children and for detecting children or populations that are not growing properly.
Interventions aimed at preventing or treating growth faltering by optimizing and
supporting the nutritional well-being of children include community-based
supplementary feeding. This is the provision of extra food to children or families beyond

[page 2]
the normal ration of their home diets, and can take place in the home, feeding centres,
healthcare centres and schools.
Current evidence suggests that community-based supplementary feeding has little to
no impact on child growth, however, the small number of studies that exist on this topic
make it difficult to reach any firm conclusions, and the results from the current
systematic review should be interpreted with caution because of the diversity of the
studies included and their limited geographical scope.
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made. In the
meantime, families and children in need should continue to be provided with
supplementary foods.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Community-based supplementary feeding for promoting the growth of children under five
years of age in low and middle income countries
Sguassero Y, de Onis M, Bonotti AM, Carroli G. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2012; Issue 6.
Art. No.: CD005039.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Protecting child health and nutrition status with ready-to-use food in addition to food
assistance in urban Chad: a cost-effectiveness analysis

[page 3]
Puett C, Salpéteur C, Lacroix E, Houngbé F, Aït-Aïssa M, Israël AD. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2013; 11(1):27.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 2 Intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO