

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Support for mothers to
initiate and establish
breastfeeding after
childbirth
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Breastfeeding has many health benefits for both the mother and infant. Breast milk
contains all the nutrients an infant needs in the first six months of life. Breastfeeding
protects against diarrhoea and common childhood illnesses such as pneumonia, and
may also have longer-term health benefits, such as reducing the risk of overweight and
obesity in childhood and adolescence.
Early initiation of breastfeeding refers to initiation of breastfeeding within one hour
after birth and ensures that the infant receives the colostrum, or “first milk”, which is

[page 2]
rich in protective factors.
Current evidence indicates that skin-to-skin contact between mother and infant
immediately after birth helps to initiate early breastfeeding and increases the likelihood
of exclusive breastfeeding in the first months of life as well as the overall duration of
breastfeeding. Infants placed in early skin-to-skin contact with their mother also appear
to interact more with their mothers and cry less. In addition, evidence indicates that
initiation of breastfeeding within 1 hour of birth reduces the risk of neonatal mortality
and improves infant survival, compared to initiation of breastfeeding at timepoints
greater than 1 hour after birth.
WHO Recommendations
Early and uninterrupted skin-to-skin contact between mothers and infants should be
facilitated and encouraged as soon as possible after birth.
All mothers should be supported to initiate breastfeeding as soon as possible after
birth, within the first hour after delivery.
Mothers should receive practical support to enable them to initiate and establish
breastfeeding and manage common breastfeeding difficulties.
Mothers should be coached on how to express breast milk as a means of maintaining
lactation in the event of their being separated temporarily from their infants.
Mothers should be supported to practise responsive feeding as part of nurturing care.
Mothers should be supported to recognize their infants’ cues for feeding, closeness and
comfort, and enabled to respond accordingly to these cues with a variety of options,
during their stay at the facility providing maternity and newborn services.
Mothers should be discouraged from giving any food or fluids other than breast milk to
their infants unless medically indicated.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding in
facilities providing maternity and newborn services
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Implementation guidance: protecting, promoting, and supporting
breastfeeding in facilities providing maternity and newborn services:
the revised Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative 2018
Baby-friendly hospital initiative: revised, updated and expanded for
integrated care
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding
Innocenti Declaration on the protection, promotion and support of
breastfeedingpdf, 1.65Mb
Innocenti Declaration 2005 on infant and young child feeding
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines

[page 4]
Delayed breastfeeding initiation and infant survival: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Smith ER, Hurt L, Chowdhury R, Sinha B, Fawzi W, Edmond KM; Neovita Study Group. PLoS One.
2017;12(7):e0180722.
Early additional food and fluids for healthy breastfed full-term infants
Smith HA, Becker GE. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 8. Art. No.: CD006462.
Methods of milk expression for lactating women
Becker GE, Smith HA, Cooney F.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 9. Art. No.:
CD006170.
Summary of this review 
Instruments for assessing readiness to commence suck feeds in preterm infants: effects on
time to establish full oral feeding and duration of hospitalisation
Crowe L, Chang A, Wallace K.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.: CD005586.
Summary of this review 
Rooming-in for new mother and infant versus separate care for increasing the duration of
breastfeeding
Jaafar SH, Ho JJ, Lee KS.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.: CD006641.
Summary of this review 
Support for healthy breastfeeding mothers with healthy term babies
McFadden A, Gavine A, Renfrew MJ, Wade A, Buchanan P, Taylor JL, Veitch E, Rennie AM, Crowther SA,
Neiman S, MacGillivray S.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD001141.
Summary of this review 
Responsive versus scheduled feeding for preterm infants
Watson J, McGuire W.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.: CD005255.
Summary of this review 
Kangaroo mother care to reduce morbidity and mortality in low birthweight infants
Conde-Agudelo A, Díaz-Rossello JL.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 8. Art. No.:
CD002771.

[page 5]
Summary of this review 
Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy newborn infants
Moore ER, Bergman N, Anderson GC, Medley N.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 11.
Art. No.: CD003519.
Summary of this review 
Baby-led compared with scheduled (or mixed) breastfeeding for successful breastfeeding
Fallon A, Van der Putten D, Dring C, Moylett EH, Fealy G, Devane D. Baby-led compared with scheduled (or
mixed) breastfeeding for successful breastfeeding.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 9.
Art. No.: CD009067.
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews
Timing of breastfeeding initiation and exclusivity of breastfeeding during the first month of
life: effects on neonatal mortality and morbidity--a systematic review and meta-analysis
Khan J, Vesel L, Bahl R, Martines JC. Matern Child Health J. 2015;19(3):468-79.
Time to initiation of breastfeeding and neonatal mortality and morbidity: a systematic review
Debes AK, Kohli A, Walker N, Edmond K and Mullany LC. BMC Public Health. 2013; 13(Suppl 3):S19.
Learn More 
Cost-effectivenеss
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions

[page 6]
This intervention is supported by
Essential Nutrition Actions targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO