

[page 1]
Tdap Vaccination for Pregnant Women
KEY POINTS
Whooping cough is a serious disease that can be deadly for young babies.
Pregnant women can give their babies protection against whooping cough (pertussis)
before their little ones are even born.
Getting a whooping cough vaccine called Tdap during pregnancy helps protect mother
and baby.
Talk to your healthcare provider about getting Tdap during your third trimester of
pregnancy.
Overview
In 2012, CDC first began recommending the use of Tdap during pregnancy to help protect the youngest of babies.
Doctors and midwives who specialize in caring for pregnant women agree that getting Tdap during pregnancy:
Is important
Helps safely protect mothers and babies
Pediatric and family doctors also support the use of Tdap during pregnancy to provide protection to babies.
The following medical associations dedicated to the health of pregnant women or children support this recommendation:
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
American College of Nurse-Midwives
American Academy of Pediatrics
American Academy of Family Physicians
Why the vaccine is important
Whooping cough is a serious disease that can be deadly for babies. Unfortunately, babies don't start building their own protection against
whooping cough until they get vaccinated at two months old. This leaves babies unprotected in the first months of life when they're at highest
risk of
Getting whooping cough
Having severe, possibly life-threatening complications from whooping cough
KEEP READING
About Whooping Cough
Passing protection to baby
DEC. 2, 2025
• ESPAÑOL
For Everyone
Whooping Cough (Pertussis)

[page 2]
After receiving Tdap, a pregnant woman's body creates protective antibodies and passes high levels of them to the baby before birth. These
antibodies provide the baby with some short-term protection against whooping cough in early life. They can protect the baby from some of the
serious complications of whooping cough.
Who should receive the vaccine and when
CDC recommends
 that pregnant women get Tdap during the 27th through 36th week of each pregnancy, preferably during the earlier part
of this time period. It doesn't matter when someone got their last tetanus/diphtheria vaccine (Td or Tdap).
Vaccination in every pregnancy offers best protection
Protective antibodies against whooping cough peak about 2 weeks after getting vaccinated with Tdap. However, it takes time to pass them to the
baby. The amount of whooping cough antibodies in the pregnant woman's body also decreases over time. That's why CDC recommends getting
Tdap early in the third trimester of each pregnancy. This is true even if pregnancies are only a year or two apart. Doing so allows each baby to
get the greatest number of protective antibodies and best protection possible against whooping cough.
Vaccination after delivery leaves baby without protective antibodies
When the mother doesn't get Tdap during pregnancy and has never received it before, she can get it after the baby is born. Once the mother
develops antibodies after vaccination—about 2 weeks—spreading whooping cough to her newborn is less likely. However, the baby will still be
at risk for catching whooping cough from others.
Breastfeeding may pass some protective antibodies onto baby
Mothers can pass some whooping cough antibodies to their babies by breastfeeding. By getting Tdap during pregnancy, women will have these
antibodies in their breast milk as soon as their milk comes in. However, their baby will not get protective antibodies immediately if they wait until
their baby is born to get vaccinated.
来自美国国
家卫生机构
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Pregnant? Help Protect Your Baby fro
Pregnant? Help Protect Your Baby fro
前往平台观看：
Pregnant? Help Protect Your Baby from Whooping Cough
Safety and effectiveness
Safety
Tdap is very safe for pregnant women and their babies. Getting vaccinated during pregnancy won't increase risk for pregnancy complications.
None of the whooping cough vaccines (Tdap and DTaP) currently used in the United States contain thimerosal.
Multiple safety systems monitor Tdap vaccination in pregnancy:
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
Manufacturer pregnancy registries
Sanofi Pasteur for Adacel®
GlaxoSmithKline for Boostrix®
[1]
Protecting baby from whooping cough
Getting Tdap between 27 through 36 weeks of pregnancy lowers the risk of whooping cough in babies younger than 2 months old by
78%.

[2]
Tdap has decade-long track record of safety during pregnancy
No safety concerns or trends (called safety signals) have been identified for babies whose mothers received Tdap during pregnancy. The
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved both Tdap vaccines (Boostrix® and Adacel®) for use during pregnancy.


[page 3]
How well it works
Many studies have looked at how well Tdap vaccination during pregnancy protects young babies. These studies have found that babies whose
mothers get Tdap during pregnancy are less likely to get whooping cough.
For example, a CDC evaluation found Tdap vaccination during the third trimester of pregnancy is effective. These data show it prevents more
than 3 in 4 cases of whooping cough in babies younger than 2 months old.
Another CDC study shows that newborn rates of whooping cough greatly decreased since Tdap was first recommended during pregnancy.
Protecting babies from serious complications
For babies who do get whooping cough, the infection is typically less serious if their mother received Tdap during pregnancy. The same
evaluation found Tdap vaccination during the third trimester of pregnancy protected 9 in 10 babies from serious infections that need treatment
in a hospital.
A study in California looked at the type and length of hospital stays for babies with whooping cough.
 Babies whose mothers received Tdap
during pregnancy
Were less likely to need care in a hospital or intensive care unit
Had shorter hospital stays
FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS
View published vaccine effectiveness studies
Possible side effects
Most side effects from Tdap are mild and don't affect daily activities. They also get better on their own in a few days.
The most common side effects from Tdap include reactions where the vaccine provider gave the shot:
Pain
Redness
Swelling
Severe side effects are extremely rare.
Tdap can't give someone whooping cough
Tdap can't give someone whooping cough since the vaccine doesn't contain any live bacteria. Whooping cough vaccines used in the United
States contain inactivated parts of the bacteria that cause whooping cough.
Where to get the vaccine
Tdap vaccines may be available at
Obstetrician-gynecologist and midwife offices
Primary care offices
Pharmacies
Health departments
Community health clinics
You can also contact your local or state health department to learn more about where to get Tdap in your community.
Resources
Pregnancy and Vaccination
View published safety studies
[2]
[3]
[2]
[4]

[page 4]
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
About Breastfeeding
SOURCES
REFERENCES
1. Havers FP, Moro PL, Hunter P, Hariri S, Bernstein H. Use of tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis vaccines:
Updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices – United States, 2019. MMWRMorb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2019;69(3)77–83.
2. Skoff TH, Blain AE, Watt J, et al. Impact of the US maternal tetanus, diphtheria, and acellular pertussis vaccination program on preventing
pertussis in infants <2 months of age: A case-control evaluation . Clin Infect Dis. 2017;65(12):1977–83.
3. Skoff TH, Deng L, Bozio C, Hariri S. U.S. infant pertussis incidence trends in the maternal Tdap vaccine era . JAMA Peds. 2023;177(4):395–
400.
4. Winter K, Cherry JD, Harriman K. Effectiveness of prenatal Tdap vaccination on pertussis severity in infants . Clin Infect Dis. 2016;64(1):9–
14.
SOURCES
ACIP Recommendations: Diphtheria, Tetanus and Pertussis (DTaP/Tdap/Td) Vaccines | ACIP Recommendations | CDC
CONTENT SOURCE:
National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases; Division of Bacterial Diseases