

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Therapeutic feeding of
children 6–59 months
of age with severe
acute malnutrition and
acute or persistent
diarrhoea
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In children who are 6–59 months of age, severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very
low weight-for-height/weight-for-length, or clinical signs of bilateral pitting oedema, or
a very low mid-upper arm circumference. Severe acute malnutrition affects an
estimated 19 million children under 5 years of age worldwide and is estimated to
account for approximately 400,000 child deaths each year.

[page 2]
Diarrhoea is common in malnourished children and can result in decreased absorption
of nutrients and significant water loss which can lead to dehydration, shock and
ultimately death. Both acute and persistent (i.e. three or more loose or watery stools in
a day, for more than 14 days) diarrhoea can worsen the harmful effects of severe acute
malnutrition if left untreated. Episodes of prolonged diarrhoea are also associated with
increased morbidity and mortality from other diseases, adverse neurodevelopment and
stunting.
Although treatment and prevention of dehydration are essential, care of severely
malnourished children must focus on the most effective and safest therapeutic feeding
approach to resolve diarrhoea while meeting their nutritional needs.
WHO Recommendations
Children who are 6–59 months of age with severe acute malnutrition who present with
either acute or persistent diarrhoea, can be given ready-to-use therapeutic food in the
same way as children without diarrhoea, whether they are being managed as inpatients
or outpatients.
Because ready-to-use therapeutic food does not contain water, children should also be
offered safe drinking water to drink at will. Breastfeeding should be continued and
offered ad libitum.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Joint statement on the community-based management of severe acute
malnutrition
The treatment of diarrhoea
Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
The effectiveness of interventions to treat severe acute malnutrition in young children: a
systematic review
Picot J, Hartwell D , Harris P, Mendes D, Clegg AJ, and Takeda A. Health Technology Assessment. 2012;
Vol.16:No.19(for Guideline: Updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and
children).
Systematic review of the care of children with diarrhoea in the community-based
management of severe acute malnutrition
Manary M, Iannotti L, Trehan I, Weisz A. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.

[page 4]
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.

[page 5]
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is a component of
managing children with SAM, which is
an Essential Nutrition Action targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 6]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO