

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Transition feeding of
children 6–59 months
of age with severe
acute malnutrition
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In children who are 6–59 months of age, severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very
low weight-for-height/weight-for-length, or clinical signs of bilateral pitting oedema, or
a very low mid-upper arm circumference. Severe acute malnutrition affects an
estimated 19 million children under 5 years of age worldwide and is estimated to
account for approximately 400,000 child deaths each year.
Severely malnourished children requiring inpatient care have medical complications
and are generally unable to tolerate usual levels of certain nutrients such as proteins,

[page 2]
initial stabilization when life-threatening complications are treated
nutritional rehabilitation when catch-up growth occurs
fats and sodium. Thus, standard inpatient management of severe acute malnutrition
involves two phases:
F-75, a low-protein milk-based formula diet, is given as the therapeutic food in the
stabilization phase, followed by a gradual transition over two days or so (transition
phase) to F-100, a milk formula with higher protein and energy content, in the
rehabilitation phase. Ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF) has replaced liquid F-100 in
the rehabilitation phase in a variety of settings where severe acute malnutrition is
treated. Most RUTFs are lipid-based pastes combining milk powder, electrolytes and
micronutrients and offer the malnourished child the same nutrient intake as F-100, with
the addition of iron.
Many treatment settings currently implement a transition phase of feeding, during
which, the amount of the rehabilitation diet, namely F-100 or RUTF, is introduced in
carefully restricted amounts for several days, until ad libitum feeding is introduced.
However, the optimal approach to transition phase feeding is unclear from practice.
WHO Recommendations
For children who are 6–59 months of age with severe acute malnutrition in inpatient
settings where RUTF is provided as the therapeutic food in the rehabilitation phase
(following F-75 in the stabilization phase), WHO recommends that once children are
stabilized, have appetite and reduced oedema and are therefore ready to move into the
rehabilitation phase, they should transition from F-75 to RUTF over 2–3 days, as
tolerated.
The recommended energy intake during this period is 100–135 kcal/kg/day. The optimal
approach for achieving this is not known and may depend on the number and skills of
staff available to supervise feeding and monitor the children during rehabilitation.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
Joint statement on the community-based management of severe acute
malnutrition
The treatment of diarrhoea
Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Systematic review of transition phase feeding of children with severe acute malnutrition as
inpatients

[page 4]
Manary M, Trehan I, Weisz A. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model

[page 5]
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is a component of
managing children with SAM, which is
an Essential Nutrition Action targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters

[page 6]
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO