

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Treatment of
hypothermia in
children with severe
acute malnutrition
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In children who are 6–59 months of age, severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very
low weight-for-height/weight-for-length, or clinical signs of bilateral pitting oedema, or
a very low mid-upper arm circumference. Severe acute malnutrition affects an
estimated 19 million children under 5 years of age worldwide and is estimated to
account for approximately 400,000 child deaths each year.
Severely malnourished children are particularly vulnerable to hypothermia, where the
body’s core temperature drops below the required temperature for normal functions.

[page 2]
Hypothermia in malnourished children often suggests coexisting hypoglycaemia or
serious infection.
The treatment or prevention of hypoglycaemia and hypothermia should be included in
the initial treatment a severely malnourished child receives when first admitted to
hospital.
clothing the child (especially the head), covering with a warmed blanket, and placing
the child near a heater (not pointing directly at the child) or incandescent lamp; or
putting the child in skin-to-skin contact on the mother’s bare chest or abdomen and
covering them with a warmed blanket and/or warm clothing.
WHO Recommendations
WHO recommends re-warming the child by:
All malnourished children with hypothermia should also be treated for hypoglycaemia
and receive broad-spectrum antimicrobials for serious systemic infection.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
GRC-approved guidelines

[page 3]
Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers
Other guidance documents
Evidence
No systematic reviews identified
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.

[page 4]
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is a component of
managing children with SAM, which is
an Essential Nutrition Action targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Category 1 intervention
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions


[page 5]
Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO