

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Use of antibiotics in
the outpatient
management of
children 6-59 months of
age with severe acute
malnutrition
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
In children who are 6–59 months of age, severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very
low weight-for-height/weight-for-length, or clinical signs of bilateral pitting oedema, or
a very low mid-upper arm circumference. Severe acute malnutrition affects an
estimated 19 million children under 5 years of age worldwide and is estimated to
account for approximately 400,000 child deaths each year.

[page 2]
Children with severe acute malnutrition may be more susceptible to infection and
studies have documented the high prevalence of pneumonia, bacteraemia and urinary
tract infections in severely malnourished children. However, as severe acute
malnutrition suppresses the immune response, it may be difficult to detect infection.
Previous recommendations were that all children with severe acute malnutrition should
be admitted to hospital and treated with a course of antibiotics. However, the
availability of ready-to-use-therapeutic foods now allows for the outpatient treatment of
large numbers of children who have severe acute malnutrition but who do not have
medical complications. Many children being treated as outpatients still have or may be
susceptible to infection.
WHO Recommendations
Children who are 6-59 months of age with uncomplicated severe acute malnutrition, not
requiring to be admitted and who are managed as outpatients, should be given a
course of oral antibiotic, such as amoxicillin.
Children who are 6-59 months of age who are undernourished but who do not have
severe acute malnutrition should not routinely receive antibiotics unless they show
signs of clinical infection.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guideline: updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in
infants and children
Pocket book of hospital care for children: Second edition
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
The effectiveness of interventions to treat severe acute malnutrition in young children: a
systematic review
Picot J, Hartwell D , Harris P, Mendes D, Clegg AJ, and Takeda A. Health Technology Assessment. 2012;
Vol.16:No.19(for Guideline: Updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and
children).
Antibiotics in severely malnourished children: systematic review of efficacy, safety and
pharmacokinetics
Lazzerini M, Tickell D. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 2011; 89(8):593–606.
Related systematic reviews
Do children with uncomplicated severe acute malnutrition need antibiotics? A systematic
review and meta-analysis
Alcoba G, Kerac M, Breysse S, Salpeteur C, Galetto-Lacour A, Briend A, Gervaix A. PLoS One. 2013;
8(1):e53184.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
The analyses listed below were conducted to assess the overall cost-effectiveness of
inpatient and/or outpatient management of SAM, of which the intervention listed on
this webpage is a component. The analyses do not assess the cost-effectiveness of this
specific intervention alone.

[page 4]
Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of acute malnutrition in Malawi
Wilford R, Golden K, Walker DG. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27(2):127-37.
Costs, cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability of community-based management of
acute malnutrition in northern Nigeria
Frankel S, Roland M, Makinen M. Washington DC: Results for Development Institute; 2015.
Cost effectiveness of community-based and in-patient therapeutic feeding programs to treat
severe acute malnutrition in Ethiopia
Tekeste A, Wondafrash M, Azene G, Deribe K. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2012; 10:4.
Cost effectiveness of community-based therapeutic care for children with severe acute
malnutrition in Zambia: decision tree model
Bachmann MO. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2009 Jan; 7:2.
The cost-effectiveness of forty health interventions in Guinea
Jha P, Bangoura O, Ranson K. Health Policy Plan. 1998; 13(3):249-62.
Cost-effectiveness of the community-based management of severe acute malnutrition by
community health workers in southern Bangladesh
Puett C, Sadler K, Alderman H, Coates J, Fiedler JL, Myatt M. Health Policy Plan. 2013; 28(4):386-99.
Cost effectiveness of a community based prevention and treatment of acute malnutrition
programme in Mumbai slums, India
Goudet S, Jayaraman A, Chanani S, Osrin D, Devleesschauwer B, Bogin B, et al. PLoS One. 2018;
13(11):e0205688.
Economic Cost of Community-Based Management of Severe Acute Malnutrition in a Rural
District in Ghana
Abdul-Latif A-M C, Nonvignon J. Health. 2014; 6: 886-899.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Category 1 intervention

[page 5]
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is a component of
managing children with SAM, which is
an Essential Nutrition Action targeting
the first 1000 days of life.
Learn More 
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO