

[page 1]

 Safe Use of Over-the-Counter (OTC) Medicines in Children
IN THIS SECTION
 An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know 
  Search 
  Menu
Use Caution When Giving Cough and Cold Products to
Kids
Safety Information for Parents and Caregivers
Children under 2 years of age should not be given any kind of cough and cold product that
contains a decongestant or antihistamine because serious and possibly life-threatening side
effects could occur. Reported side effects of these products included convulsions, rapid heart
rates and death. What about older children? When giving cough and cold medicine to
children over 2 years of age, parents and caregivers should use caution.
Feedback

[page 2]
A meeting about the safety and effectiveness of cough and cold drug product use in children
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2007 revealed that there were many reports of
harm, and even death, in children who used these products. During 2004-2005, an estimated
1,519 children less than 2 years of age were treated in U.S. emergency departments for
adverse events, including overdoses, associated with cough and cold medications.
Manufacturers voluntarily removed over-the-counter (OTC) infant cough and cold products
intended for children under 2 years of age due to these safety concerns.
Treating Toddlers and Older Children
Cough and cold products for children older than 2 years of age were not affected by the
voluntary removal and these products are still sold in pharmacies and other retail outlets.
Manufactures also voluntarily re-labeled these cough and cold products to state: “do not use
in children under 4 years of age.” 
Parents need to be aware that many OTC cough and cold products contain multiple
ingredients which can lead to accidental overdosing. Reading the Drug Facts label can help
parents learn about what drugs (active ingredients) are in a product.
When giving children 4 years of age and older a cough and cold product, remember, OTC
cough and cold products can be harmful if:
more than the recommended amount is used
they are given too often
more than one product containing the same drug is being used.
Children should not be given medicines that are packaged and made for adults. 
Other Options for Treating Colds
Here are a few alternative treatments for infants to help with cough and cold symptoms:
A cool mist humidifier helps nasal passages shrink and allow easier breathing. Do not
use warm mist humidifiers. They can cause nasal passages to swell and make
breathing more difficult  
Saline nose drops or spray keep nasal passages moist and helps avoid stuffiness  
Nasal suctioning with a bulb syringe -- with or without saline nose drops -- works very
well for infants less than a year old. Older children often resist the use of a bulb syringe
 
Acetaminophen or ibuprofen can be used to reduce fever, aches and pains. Parents
should carefully read and follow the product’s instructions for use on the Drug Facts

[page 3]
Was this page helpful? *
Submit
label  
Drinking plenty of liquids will help children stay hydrated.
Resources For You
FDA Releases Recommendations Regarding Use of Over-the-Counter Cough and Cold
Products
OTC Cough and Cold Products: Not For Infants and Children Under 2 Years of Age
Content current as of:
02/08/2018
Yes
No
An official form of the United States government. Provided by Touchpoints
FDA Archive
About FDA
Accessibility
Visitor Information
Website Policies / Privacy
No FEAR Act
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy

[page 4]
FOIA
HHS.gov
USA.gov
Contact FDA
 
 
  
 1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)