

[page 1]
Multiple Vaccines at Once
QUESTIONS AND CONCERNS | PAGE 6 OF 9 
| 
ALL PAGES 
KEY POINTS
Many vaccines are recommended early in life to protect young children from dangerous infectious diseases. Different childhood vaccines can
be given at the same time.
Why it's important
Vaccines are the best defense against infections that may have serious complications such as pneumonia, meningitis, cancer, and even death.
CDC recommends vaccinations before the age of two years to protect children against 14 infectious diseases: measles, mumps, rubella (German
measles), varicella (chickenpox), hepatitis A, hepatitis B, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough), Haemophilus influenzae Type b (Hib),
polio, influenza (flu), rotavirus, and pneumococcal disease.
Newborn babies are immune to some diseases because they have antibodies they get from their mothers, usually before they are born. However,
this immunity lasts a few months. Most babies do not get protective antibodies against diphtheria, whooping cough, polio, tetanus, hepatitis B, or
Hib from their mothers. This is why it's important to vaccinate a child before she or he is exposed to a disease.
Vaccines contain weakened or killed versions of the germs that cause a disease. These elements of vaccines, and other molecules and micro-
organisms that stimulate the immune system, are called "antigens." Babies are exposed to thousands of germs and other antigens in the
environment from the time they are born. When a baby is born, his or her immune system is ready to respond to the many antigens in the
environment and the selected antigens in vaccines.
Advantages
Background
Many vaccines are recommended early in life to protect young children from dangerous infectious diseases. Different childhood vaccines can be
given at the same time.
Examples of combination vaccines are: DTap (diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis), trivalent IPV (three strains of inactivated polio vaccine), MMR
(measles, mumps, rubella), DTap-Hib, and Hib-Hep B.
Often, more than one shot will be given during the same doctor’s visit, usually in separate limbs (e.g. one in each arm). For example, a baby
might get DTaP in one arm or leg and IPV in another arm or leg during the same visit.
Fact
Early vaccination is important to prevent diseases. Children are given shots (vaccines) at a young age because this is when they are at
highest risk of getting sick or dying if they get these diseases.

Did you know?
In order to reduce the number of shots a child receives in a doctor's visit, some vaccines are offered as combination vaccines. A combination
vaccine is two or more different vaccines that have been combined into a single shot. Combination vaccines have been in use in the United
States since the mid-1940s.

DECEMBER 20, 2024
For Everyone
Vaccine Safety

[page 2]
Advantages
1. Children should be given their vaccines as quickly as possible to give them protection during the vulnerable early months of their lives.
2. Giving several shots at the same time means fewer office visits. This saves parents time and money, and can be less traumatic for the child.
What the research shows
Scientific data show that getting several vaccines at the same time does not cause any chronic health problems. A number of studies have been
done to look at the effects of giving various combinations of vaccines, and when every new vaccine is licensed, it has been tested along with the
vaccines already recommended for a particular aged child. The recommended vaccines have been shown to be as effective in combination as
they are individually. Sometimes, certain combinations of vaccines given together can cause fever, and occasionally febrile seizures; these are
temporary and do not cause any lasting damage. Based on this information, both the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices and the
American Academy of Pediatrics recommend getting all routine childhood vaccines on time.
From the moment babies are born, they are exposed to numerous bacteria and viruses on a daily basis. Eating food introduces new bacteria into
the body; numerous bacteria live in the mouth and nose; and an infant places his or her hands or other objects in his or her mouth hundreds of
times every hour, exposing the immune system to still more germs. When a child has a cold, he or she is exposed to up to 10 antigens, and
exposure to "strep throat" is about 25 to 50 antigens. Each vaccine in the childhood vaccination schedule has between 1-69 antigens. A child
who receives all the recommended vaccines in the 2018 childhood immunization schedule may be exposed to up to 320 antigens through
vaccination by the age of 2.
In fact, a 1994 report from the Institute of Medicine, Adverse Events Associated with Childhood Vaccines , states: "In the face of these normal
events, it seems unlikely that the number of separate antigens contained in childhood vaccines ...would represent an appreciable added burden
on the immune system that would be immunosuppressive."
What CDC is doing
CDC and FDA are committed to monitoring the safety of vaccines. Once vaccines are licensed or authorized by FDA for use in the United States,
CDC, FDA, and other federal agencies work together to monitor them using several safety systems.
KEEP READING:
About CDC’s Vaccine Safety Monitoring Program
SOURCES
Fact
Getting multiple vaccines at the same time has been shown to be safe.

Fact
CDC's recommended childhood vaccine schedule ensures children get the best protection during the many different stages in growth and
development.

Fact
CDC and FDA closely monitor the safety of all vaccines.

TABLE OF CONTENTS | QUESTIONS AND CONCERNS
SHOW MORE
Adjuvants
Autism
Fainting
Febrile Seizures
Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)
Multiple Vaccines at Once
•
•
•
•
•


CONTENT SOURCE:

[page 3]
National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)