

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin E and C
supplementation
during pregnancy
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin E functions as a lipid-soluble antioxidant, protecting cells of the body from
damage by harmful free radicals (i.e. reactive oxygen molecules) and may have other
physiological functions. Vitamin C has also antioxidant properties, and is additionally
involved in the synthesis of collagen and metabolism of iron and folate.
As antioxidants, vitamins E and C act synergistically to help prevent oxidative stress,
which is an imbalance in the amount of free radicals circulating in the body and the
availability of antioxidants to counter the free radicals. Vitamin E and C
supplementation is thus often given concurrently.

[page 2]
Links have been made between oxidative stress during pregnancy and the development
of pre-eclampsia, and increased risk of intrauterine growth restriction and pre-labour
rupture of membranes (PROM). Oxidative stress has also been implicated in many
disorders common to preterm infants including chronic lung disease, necrotising
enterocolitis and others. However, currently available evidence indicates that
supplementation with vitamin E and C together likely has little to no effect on relevant
outcomes in mothers and infants, and may in fact increase the risk of PROM.
WHO Recommendations
Vitamin E and C supplementation is not recommended for pregnant women to improve
maternal and perinatal outcomes.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy
experience
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Vitamin C supplementation in pregnancy
Rumbold A, Ota E, Nagata C, Shahrook S, Crowther CA. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2015;
Issue 9. Art. No.: CD004072.
Summary of this review 
Vitamin E supplementation in pregnancy
Rumbold A, Ota E, Hori H, Miyazaki C, Crowther CA. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2015; Issue
9. Art. No.: CD004069.
Summary of this review

[page 3]
Related Cochrane reviews
Vitamin supplementation for preventing miscarriage
Balogun OO, da Silva Lopes K, Ota E, Takemoto Y, Rumbold A, Takegata M, Mori R. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 5. Art. No.: CD004073.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Implementation of this intervention is not recommended.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 4]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO