

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin A
supplementation in
infants 1–5 months of
age
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin A deficiency affects about 190 million preschool-age children, mostly from
Africa and South-East Asia. In infants and children, vitamin A is essential to support
rapid growth and to help combat infections. Inadequate intakes of vitamin A may lead
to vitamin A deficiency which can cause visual impairment in the form of night
blindness and may increase the risk of illness and death from childhood infections,
including measles and those causing diarrhoea.

[page 2]
Generally, infants are born with low vitamin A stores and are dependent on external
sources, most importantly breast milk. In settings where vitamin A deficiency and/or
undernutrition is common, infants are likely to receive inadequate amounts of vitamin A
from breast milk due to poor maternal nutritional status.
In many countries where vitamin A deficiency is a public health problem, vitamin A
supplements are provided to children 6–59 months of age to reduce the risk of illness
and death. In infants less than 6 months of age however, studies indicate that vitamin A
supplementation provides no benefit in terms of reducing risk of illness and death.
WHO Recommendations
Vitamin A supplementation in infants 1–5 months of age is not recommended as a
public health intervention for the reduction of morbidity and mortality.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Vitamin A supplementation for infants 1–5 months of age
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of morbidity and mortality in infants one to six
months of age
Gogia S, Sachdev HS.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD007480.
Summary of this review

[page 3]
Related Cochrane reviews
Vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of morbidity and mortality in infants six
months of age or less
Imdad A, Ahmed Z, Bhutta ZA. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 9. Art. No.:
CD007480. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007480.pub3.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Implementation of this intervention is not recommended
More about this feature
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters

[page 4]
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO