

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin A fortification
of staple foods
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin A is important for visual health, immune function and fetal growth and
development. Vitamin A deficiency is a public health problem in many parts of the
world, particularly Africa and South-East Asia. It can cause visual impairment in the
form of night blindness and, in children, may increase the risk of illness and death from
childhood infections, including measles and those causing diarrhoea.
Fortification is the practice of deliberately increasing the content of an essential
micronutrient, i.e. vitamins and minerals (including trace elements) in a food, so as to
improve the nutritional quality of the food supply and provide a public health benefit
with minimal risk to health.

[page 2]
Fortification of staple foods with vitamin A may be a cost-effective intervention for
reducing vitamin A deficiency, especially in settings where improving dietary quality
through food variety is not possible. Foods such as edible oils and fats, cereal grains,
condiments, refined sugar and milk have been successfully fortified with vitamin A and
studies have shown that consumption of vitamin A-fortified foods can improve vitamin
A status.
Current research is aimed at further assessing the benefits and harms of fortifying
staple foods on vitamin A status and health-related outcomes in the general population.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Guidelines on food fortification with micronutrients
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Other guidance documents
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Fortification of staple foods with vitamin A for vitamin A deficiency
Hombali AS, Solon J, Venkatesh BT, Nair N, Peña-Rosas J. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019;
Issue 5. Art. No.: CD010068.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness

[page 3]
Cost-effectiveness analyses
Cost effectiveness analysis of strategies for child health in developing countries
Edejer TT, Aikins M, Black R, Wolfson L, Hutubessy R, Evans DB. BMJ. 2005; 331(7526):1177.
Vitamin A fortification in Uganda: comparing the feasibility, coverage, costs, and cost-
effectiveness of fortifying vegetable oil and sugar
Fiedler JL, Afidra R. Food Nutr Bull. 2010; 31(2):193-205.
A strategic approach to the unfinished fortification agenda: feasibility, costs, and cost-
effectiveness analysis of fortification programs in 48 countries
Fiedler JL, Macdonald B. Food Nutr Bull. 2009; 30(4):283-316.
The costs and effectiveness of three vitamin A interventions in Guatemala
Phillips M, Sanghvi T, Suárez R, McKigney J, Fiedler J. Soc Sci Med. 1996; 42(12):1661-8.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 2 intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 4]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO