

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin D
supplementation and
respiratory infections
in children
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin D is known to play an important role in bone metabolism through regulation of
calcium and phosphate homeostasis and may also play an important role in immune
system regulation. Vitamin D is produced by the body during exposure to sunlight, but
is also found in oily fish, eggs and fortified food products.
In addition to causing rickets, vitamin D deficiency has been linked to respiratory
infections such as pneumonia, tuberculosis and bronchiolitis. Pneumonia is a severe

[page 2]
form of acute lower respiratory tract infection and is the leading cause of death in
children worldwide.
Some studies have suggested that vitamin D supplementation can decrease the
frequency and severity of respiratory infections among children, however further
research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Vitamin D supplementation for preventing infections in children under five years of age
Yakoob MY, Salam RA, Khan FR, Bhutta ZA. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 11. Art.
No.: CD008824.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Vitamin D for prevention of respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Charan J, Goyal JP, Saxena D, Yadav P. Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics. 2012; 3:300-3.
Vitamin D and Respiratory Tract Infections: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of
Randomized Controlled Trials
Bergman P, Lindh AU, Björkhem-Bergman L, Lindh JD. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e65835.
Vitamin D supplementation to prevent acute respiratory tract infections: systematic review
and meta-analysis of individual participant data

[page 3]
Martineau AR, Jolliffe DA, Hooper RL, Greenberg L, Aloia JF, Bergman P et al. BMJ. 2017;356:i6583.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Vitamin D supplementation and
respiratory infections in children
Vitamin D for prevention of
respiratory tract infections
Category 2 Intervention
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Commentary
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 4]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO