

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin D
supplementation
during pregnancy
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin D is known to play an important role in bone metabolism through regulation of
calcium and phosphate equilibrium. Vitamin D is produced by the body during exposure
to sunlight, but is also found in oily fish, eggs and fortified food products.
Vitamin D deficiency is thought to be common among pregnant women in some
populations, and has been found to be associated with an increased risk of pre-
eclampsia, gestational diabetes mellitus, preterm birth, and other tissue-specific
conditions.

[page 2]
Vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy improves maternal vitamin D status and
may reduce the risk of pre-eclampsia, low birthweight and preterm birth. However, the
evidence currently available to directly assess the benefits and harms of the use of
vitamin D supplementation alone in pregnancy for improving maternal and infant
health outcomes is limited.
Pregnant women should be encouraged to receive adequate nutrition, which is best
achieved through consumption of a healthy balanced diet.
WHO Recommendations
Oral vitamin D supplementation is not recommended for all pregnant women to
improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.*
* This recommendation updates and does not alter the respective WHO
recommendation on vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy found in the 2016
WHO ANC guideline.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Nutritional interventions update: vitamin D supplements during
pregnancy
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy
experience
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines

[page 3]
Vitamin D supplementation for women during pregnancy
De-Regil LM, Palacios C, Lombardo LK, Peña-Rosas JP. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016;
Issue 1. Art. No.: CD008873.
Summary of this review 
Related Cochrane reviews
Vitamin D supplementation for women during pregnancy.
Palacios C, Kostiuk LK, Peña‐Rosas JP. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019; Issue 7. Art. No.:
CD008873.
Regimens of vitamin D supplementation for women during pregnancy
Palacios C, Trak‐Fellermeier MA, Martinez RX, Lopez‐Perez L, Lips P, Salisi JA, John JC, Peña‐Rosas JP.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019; Issue 10. Art. No.: CD013446.
Related systematic reviews
Effect of vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy on maternal and neonatal outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Pérez-López FR, Pasupuleti V, Mezones-Holguin E, Benites-Zapata VA, Thota P, Deshpande A, Hernandez AV.
Fertility and Sterility. 2015; 103(5):1278-88.e4.
Vitamin D during pregnancy and maternal, neonatal and infant health outcomes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis
Thorne-Lyman A, Fawzi WW. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology. 2012; 26(s1):75–90.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Implementation of this intervention is not recommended.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Category 1 Intervention

[page 4]
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO