

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin A
supplementation in
HIV-infected adults
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin A is important for visual health, immune function and fetal growth and
development. Vitamin A deficiency is a public health problem in many parts of the
world, particularly Africa and South-East Asia. It can cause visual impairment in the
form of night blindness and, in children, may increase the risk of illness and death from
childhood infections, including measles and those causing diarrhoea.
In HIV-infected adults, low levels of vitamin A in the blood have been associated with
increases in disease progression and risk of mortality. Providing vitamin A supplements
to HIV-infected adults may therefore be expected to delay disease progression, however

[page 2]
results from studies to date are inconsistent, with the majority providing no clear
indication of benefit.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Micronutrient supplementation in adults with HIV infection
Visser ME, Durao S, Sinclair D, Irlam JH, Siegfried N. Micronutrient supplementation in adults with HIV
infection.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 5. Art. No.: CD003650.
Summary of this review 
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 2 intervention
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale

[page 3]
Vitamin A supplementation and
disease progression in HIV-infected
adults
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO