

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin A
supplementation
during pregnancy
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin A is important for visual health, immune function and fetal growth and
development. Vitamin A deficiency is a public health problem in many parts of the
world, particularly Africa and South-East Asia. It can cause visual impairment in the
form of night blindness and, in children, may increase the risk of illness and death from
childhood infections, including measles and those causing diarrhoea.
Although pregnant women are susceptible to vitamin A deficiency throughout
gestation, susceptibility is at its highest during the third trimester of pregnancy due to

[page 2]
accelerated fetal development and the physiological increase in blood volume during
this period.
While there is some indication that low doses of vitamin A supplements given to
pregnant women on a daily or weekly basis, starting in the second or third trimester,
can reduce the severity of decline in maternal serum retinol levels during late
pregnancy and the symptoms of night blindness, current evidence indicates that
vitamin A supplementation during pregnancy does not reduce the risk of illness or
death in mothers or their infants.
Pregnant women should be encouraged to receive adequate nutrition, which is best
achieved through consumption of a healthy balanced diet.
WHO Recommendations
Vitamin A supplementation is only recommended for pregnant women in areas where
vitamin A deficiency is a severe public health problem*, to prevent night blindness.**
* Vitamin A deficiency is a severe public health problem if ≥5% of women in a
population have a history of night blindness in their most recent pregnancy in the
previous 3–5 years that ended in a live birth, or if ≥20% of pregnant women have a
serum retinol level <0.70 µmol/L. Determination of vitamin A deficiency as a public
health problem involves estimating the prevalence of deficiency in a population by
using specific biochemical and clinical indicators of vitamin A status.
** This recommendation supercedes the previous recommendation found in the WHO
guideline ‘Vitamin A supplementation in pregnant women (2011).
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy
experience
GRC-approved guidelines
Other guidance documents

[page 3]
Global prevalence of vitamin A deficiency in populations at risk 1995-
2005 : WHO global database on vitamin A deficiency ﻿
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Vitamin A supplementation during pregnancy for maternal and newborn outcomes
McCauley ME, van den Broek N, Dou L, Othman M. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2015; Issue
10. Art. No.: CD008666.
Summary of this review 
Related Cochrane reviews
Vitamin supplementation for preventing miscarriage
Balogun OO, da Silva Lopes K, Ota E, Takemoto Y, Rumbold A, Takegata M, Mori R. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 5. Art. No.: CD004073.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Evidence of the impact of vitamin A supplementation on maternal and child health.
Oliveira JM, Rondo, PHC. Cadernos de Saúde Pública. 2007; 23(11):2565–2575.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Review Committee
Learn More 
This intervention is an Essential
Nutrition Action targeting the first 1000
days of life.
Learn More 
Essential Nutrition Actions
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO