

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin A
supplementation in
HIV-infected women
during pregnancy
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Over 1000 new cases of mother-to-child transmission of the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) occur worldwide every day, making this the main route of transmission of
HIV infection in children. Vitamin A deficiency also affects about 19 million pregnant
women, mostly from the WHO regions of Africa and South-East Asia, and has been
associated with an increase in the risk of transmission of HIV from mother to child.
During pregnancy, vitamin A is essential for maternal health and for the healthy
development of the fetus. As vitamin A also plays an important role in immune function,

[page 2]
it has been suggested that providing vitamin A supplements to HIV positive women
during pregnancy may reduce the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV. Results
from studies to date are inconsistent however, with the majority providing no clear
indication of benefit.
WHO Recommendations
Vitamin A supplementation in HIV-positive pregnant women is not recommended as a
public health intervention for reducing the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Vitamin A supplementation during pregnancy for reducing the risk of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Vitamin A supplementation for reducing the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV
infection
Wiysonge CS, Shey M, Kongnyuy EJ, Sterne JAC, Brocklehurst P. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2011; Issue 1. Art. No.: CD003648.
Summary of this review 
Related Cochrane reviews

[page 3]
Vitamin A supplementation for reducing the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV
infection.
Wiysonge CS, Ndze VN, Kongnyuy EJ, Shey MS. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2017; Issue 9.
Art. No.: CD003648.
Related systematic reviews
A systematic review of randomized controlled trials of prenatal and postnatal vitamin A
supplementation of HIV-infected women.
Kongnyuy EJ, Wiysonge CS, Shey MS. International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics. 2009; 104(1):5–8.
Vitamin supplementation for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and pre-term
delivery: a systematic review of randomized trial including more than 2800 women.
Mills EJ, Wu P, Seely D, Guyatt GH. AIDS Research and Therapy. 2005; 2:4.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Implementation of this intervention is not recommended.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us


[page 4]
Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO