

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin A
supplementation in
children with
respiratory infections
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Pneumonia is a severe form of acute lower respiratory tract infection and is the leading
cause of death among children under 5 years of age worldwide. Vitamin A deficiency is
also a public health problem in many parts of the world, particularly Africa and South-
East Asia. Vitamin A deficiency can cause visual impairment in the form of night
blindness and may increase the risk of illness and death from childhood infections,
including measles and those causing diarrhoea.

[page 2]
Vitamin A is essential to help combat infections in childhood and clinical trials have
demonstrated that vitamin A supplementation reduces the severity of respiratory
infections and mortality in children with measles. However results from studies in
children without measles suggest that vitamin A has little protective effect except in
children suffering from acute or chronic malnutrition, where some benefit of vitamin A
supplementation has been observed.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Vitamin A for non-measles pneumonia in children
Wu T, Ni J, Wei J.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2005, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD003700.
Summary of this review 
Vitamin A for preventing acute lower respiratory tract infections in children up to seven years
of age
Chen H, Zhuo Q, Yuan W, Wang J, Wu T.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 1. Art. No.:
CD006090.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Vitamin A for acute respiratory infection in developing countries: a meta-analysis.
Brown N, Roberts C. Acta Paediatrica. 2004; 93(11):1437–1442.

[page 3]
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Vitamin A supplementation to
improve treatment outcomes among
children diagnosed with respiratory
infections
Category 2 intervention
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 4]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO