

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin D
supplementation in
infants
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin D is known to play an important role in bone metabolism through regulation of
calcium and phosphate homeostasis and may also play an important role in immune
system regulation. Vitamin D is produced by the body during exposure to sunlight, but
is also found in oily fish, eggs and fortified food products.
Infants are born with low vitamin D stores and are dependent on breast milk, sunlight
or supplements as sources of vitamin D in the first few months of life. As the vitamin D
content of breast milk is dependent on maternal vitamin D status and is often low, and
sun exposure may be restricted for infants living at higher latitudes or for cultural or

[page 2]
other reasons, infants are particularly vulnerable to vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D
deficiency in infants can lead to bone malformation (rickets), seizures and difficulty
breathing.
Current evidence suggests that vitamin D supplements may be effective in preventing
rickets, particularly for infants and children who may be at higher risk due to limited
sun exposure or those with darker skin pigmentation, however further research is
needed before specific recommendations can be made.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Interventions for the prevention of nutritional rickets in term born children
Lerch C, Meissner T. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2007; Issue 4. Art. No.: CD006164.
Summary of this review 
The effects of oral vitamin D supplementation on linear growth and non-communicable
diseases among infants and children younger than five years of age (protocol)
Yu EA, Huey SL, Peña-Rosas JP, Mehta S. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2017; Issue 11. Art. No.:
CD012875.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Category 2 Intervention

[page 3]
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Vitamin D Supplementation for
Infants
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO