

[page 1]
Vitamin D and Breastfeeding
WHAT TO KNOW
Vitamin D supports healthy bone development. It helps prevent rickets, a condition that
causes weak or deformed bones. Learn more about vitamin D considerations for breastfed
infants.
Do infants get enough vitamin D from breast milk?
No. Breast milk alone does not provide infants with enough vitamin D. Shortly after birth, most breastfed infants will need an additional source
of vitamin D through a supplement.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend that breastfed and partially breastfed infants receive
400 International Units (IU) of vitamin D daily beginning in the first few days of life.
Families who do not wish to provide a supplement directly to their infant should discuss the risks and benefits of maternal high-dose
supplements with a health care provider.
Why are breastfed infants at risk for vitamin D deficiency?
The risk for vitamin D deficiency increases when there is limited exposure to sunlight or when an infant is not consuming an adequate amount of
vitamin D.
Other factors that decrease the amount of vitamin D a person can make from sunlight include:
Living at high latitudes (closer to the polar regions), particularly during winter.
High levels of air pollution.
Dense cloud covering.
The degree to which clothing covers the skin.
Use of sunscreen.
Darker skin types.
All children need vitamin D beginning shortly after birth.
Children younger than 12 months old need 400 IU of vitamin D each day.
Children 12 to 24 months old need 600 IU of vitamin D each day.

SEPT. 23, 2025
For Health Care Providers
Breastfeeding special circumstances

[page 2]
Because adequate sunshine exposure varies and sunshine exposure may increase the risk of skin cancer, vitamin D supplementation is
recommended for breastfed infants.
Learn more:
Micronutrient Facts: Vitamin D
Infant and Toddler Nutrition: Vitamin D
Prevention of Rickets and Vitamin D Deficiency in Infants, Children, and Adolescents —American Academy of Pediatrics
Policy Statement on Ultraviolet Radiation Exposure for Children and Adolescents —American Academy of Pediatrics
Sun Safety Facts—CDC
Vitamin D Fact Sheet for Health Professionals —National Institutes of Health
Vitamin D Fact Sheet for Consumers —National Institutes of Health
SOURCES
Did you know?
For tips on reducing the risk of skin cancer from sun exposure, visit Sun Safety: Information for Parents About Sunburn & Sunscreen .

CONTENT SOURCE:
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (NCCDPHP)