

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin A
supplementation in
postpartum women
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin A is important for visual health, immune function and fetal growth and
development. Vitamin A deficiency is a public health problem in many parts of the
world, particularly Africa and South-East Asia. It can cause visual impairment in the
form of night blindness and, in children, may increase the risk of illness and death from
childhood infections, including measles and those causing diarrhoea.
Generally, infants are born with low vitamin A stores and are dependent on external
sources, most importantly breast milk. Maternal dietary intake during pregnancy and

[page 2]
postpartum is therefore an important determinant both of maternal vitamin A status
and the vitamin A status of her infant.
In settings where vitamin A deficiency and/or undernutrition is common, mothers may
produce breast milk with inadequate concentrations of vitamin A. Vitamin A
supplementation in postpartum women might be expected to improve maternal
vitamin A status, thereby increasing the vitamin A content of breast milk and improving
the health of mother and infant. Current evidence suggests however, that vitamin A
supplementation in postpartum women does not reduce the risk of illness or death in
mothers or their infants.
Postpartum women should be encouraged to receive adequate nutrition, which is best
achieved through consumption of a balanced healthy diet.
WHO Recommendations
Vitamin A supplementation in postpartum women for the prevention of maternal and
infant morbidity and mortality is not recommended.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Vitamin A supplementation in postpartum women
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Vitamin A supplementation for postpartum women
Oliveira-Menegozzo JM, Bergamaschi DP, Middleton P, East CE. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2010; Issue 10. Art. No.: CD005944.

[page 3]
Maternal postpartum vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of mortality and
morbidity in infancy: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials
Gogia S, Sachdev HS. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2010; 39(5):1217–1226.
Vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of morbidity and mortality in infants six
months of age or less
Gogia S, Sachdev HS.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD007480.
Summary of this review 
Related Cochrane reviews
Vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of morbidity and mortality in infants one to six
months of age
Imdad A, Ahmed Z, Bhutta ZA. Vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of morbidity and mortality in
infants one to six months of age.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 9. Art. No.:
CD007480.
Summary of this review 
Vitamin A supplementation for postpartum women
Oliveira JM, Allert R, East CE.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD005944.
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews
Vitamin A supplementation during puerperium: systematic review.
Caminha MFC, Filho MB, dos Santos Fernandes TF, Grande de Arruda IK, da Silva Diniz A. Revista de Saúde
Pública. 2009; 43(4):699–706.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Implementation of this intervention is not recommended.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Category 1 intervention

[page 4]
Learn More 
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO