

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Vitamin A
supplementation in
neonates
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Vitamin A deficiency is a public health problem in many parts of the world, particularly
Africa and South-East Asia. In infants and children, vitamin A is essential to support
rapid growth and to help combat infections. Inadequate intakes of vitamin A may lead
to vitamin A deficiency which can cause visual impairment in the form of night
blindness and may increase the risk of illness and death from childhood infections,
including measles and those causing diarrhoea.
Generally, infants are born with low vitamin A stores and are dependent on external
sources, most importantly breast milk. In settings where vitamin A deficiency and/or

[page 2]
undernutrition is common, infants are likely to receive inadequate amounts of vitamin A
from breast milk due to poor maternal nutritional status.
In many countries where vitamin A deficiency is a public health problem, vitamin A
supplements are provided to children 6–59 months of age to reduce the risk of illness
and death and there has been considerable interest in vitamin A supplementation in the
neonatal period to achieve the same outcomes. Results from studies to date – including
three large trials conducted in India, Ghana and Tanzania – are inconsistent, however,
with most providing no clear indication of benefit of neonatal vitamin A
supplementation.
WHO Recommendations
At the present time, neonatal vitamin A supplementation (that is, supplementation
within the first 28 days after birth) is not recommended as a public health intervention
to reduce infant morbidity and mortality.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
Neonatal vitamin A supplementation
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Neonatal vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of mortality and morbidity in term
neonates in low and middle income countries
Haider BA, Bhutta ZA. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD006980.

[page 3]
Summary of this review 
Vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of morbidity and mortality in infants six
months of age
Gogia S, Sachdev HS.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD007480.
Summary of this review 
Related Cochrane reviews
Neonatal vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of mortality and morbidity in term
neonates in low and middle income countries.
Haider BA, Sharma R, Bhutta ZA. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 2. Art. No.:
CD006980.
Summary of this review 
Vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of morbidity and mortality in infants one to six
months of age
Imdad A, Ahmed Z, Bhutta ZA. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 9. Art. No.:
CD007480.
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews
Neonatal vitamin A supplementation and infant survival
Kirkwood B, Humphrey J, Moulton L, Martines J. The Lancet. 2010; 376(9753):1643–1644.
Neonatal vitamin A supplementation for prevention of mortality and morbidity in infancy:
systematic review of randomised controlled trials
Gogia S, Singh Sachdev H. British Medical Journal. 2009; 338:b919.
Vitamin A supplementation and neonatal mortality in the developing world: a meta-regression
of cluster-randomized trials
Rotondi MA, Khobzi N. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 2010; 88(9):697–702.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness

[page 4]
Implementation of this intervention is not recommended.
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO