

[page 1]
Common Names
Jump to:
For Patients & Caregivers
Tell your healthcare providers about any dietary supplements you’re taking, such as
herbs, vitamins, minerals, and natural or home remedies. This will help them manage
your care and keep you safe.
What is it?
Wheat grass juice has not been shown effective in treating cancer
or AIDS. 
The juice extracted from the leaves of wheat grass is believed to
prevent tooth decay, reduce high blood pressure and arthritis pain,
For appointments, call: 800-525-2225
Wheatgrass
Couchgrass
For Patients & Caregivers
For Healthcare Professionals
Wheat grass
Purported Benefits, Side Effects & More
Search About Herbs
Search
What can we help you find today?
Search

[page 2]
and treat chronic fatigue syndrome and the common cold. It is also
being promoted as a cure for cancer and AIDS. Proponents of
wheat grass believe that the chlorophyll present in the leaves
increases hemoglobin content in the blood because both
molecules are similar in structure. It is also thought that the
enzymes present in wheat grass help rid the body of toxins and
carcinogens. However, none of these claims is backed by scientific
studies.
Wheat grass is not known to cause any serious side effects.
However, the juice can be contaminated with mold or bacteria as
the leaves are grown for 7–10 days before the juice is extracted.
What are the potential uses and benefits?
AIDS
There is no scientific evidence that wheat grass prevents or
treats AIDS.
Chronic fatigue syndrome
No scientific evidence supports this use.
Cancer treatment
There is no scientific evidence that wheat grass prevents or
treats cancer.
Strengthen immune system
A small study showed that wheat grass juice reduced fever
and infection in patients receiving chemotherapy, but some
patients also had nausea from ingesting wheat grass. Larger
studies are needed.
Reduce serum iron level
There is a small study showing wheat grass juice can act as a
chelator and help reduce iron levels in patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome.
Ulcerative colitis
One small study has shown that wheat grass can relieve
symptoms associated with chronic colon inflammation.

[page 3]
What are the side effects?
For Healthcare Professionals
Scientific Name
Triticum aestivum
Clinical Summary
Wheat grass is prepared by sprouting wheat seeds in water for 7–10
days before harvesting the leaves. Because the leaves are fibrous
and difficult to digest, the juice from the leaves is extracted and
consumed raw. Proponents believe the enzymes responsible for
detoxifying the body are deactivated by the cooking process.
Wheat grass is also marketed as a nutritional supplement in powder
form.
Wheat grass juice has been claimed to neutralize toxins and
carcinogens in the body, prevent tooth decay, reduce high blood
pressure, and aid in the treatment and prevention of cancer and
AIDS. It is also used to improve digestion, and for common colds,
cough, rheumatic pain, chronic fatigue syndrome, ulcers, and skin
conditions. However, none of these claims are supported by clinical
studies.
Wheat grass proponents also equate its major constituent
chlorophyll to hemoglobin, and believe that wheat grass
consumption can increase oxygenation in the body. However,
these concepts are not supported by current scientific
understanding.
Animal models suggest that wheat grass may have
hypolipidemic 
 and antioxidant 
 effects. Preliminary studies in
Nausea, difficulties in swallowing the juice due to strong
grass-like taste.
Contamination by microbials is possible as wheat grass
sprouts are grown for 7–10 days before the leaves are
harvested.
(1)
(2)

[page 4]
humans suggest wheat grass supplementation may reduce plasma
lipid peroxidation in healthy volunteers engaged in regular
exercise 
 or atherogenic lipoproteins in hyperlipidemic
women 
. A small study and systematic review indicate that
wheat grass juice may be helpful for ulcerative colitis 
. Other
studies are mixed on whether it can reduce the need for
transfusions in patients with thalassemia major 
. Wheat
grass juice may decrease myelotoxicity in breast cancer patients
undergoing chemotherapy 
. There is also a report that it can
reduce serum ferritin in patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome 
. Larger studies are needed to evaluate these
findings.
Nausea has been reported following consumption of wheat grass
juice. Because it is consumed raw, microbial contamination is also a
concern.
Purported Uses and Benefits
Mechanism of Action
Wheat grass is a natural source of vitamins and minerals including
vitamins A, C, E, K and B-complex, as well as iron, calcium,
magnesium, and selenium. It also contains chlorophyll, amino acids,
bioflavonoids such as apigenin, and phenolic
compounds  
. Some components may have
antioxidant effects, as increases in glutathione and vitamin C levels
have been noted 
. Reductions in neutropenic fever and
infection with wheat grass may relate to anti-inflammatory
properties of apigenin, which can inhibit adhesion of leucocytes to
(3)
(14)
(4) (5)
(6) (7) (8)
(9)
(13)
AIDS
Cancer 
Chronic fatigue 
Immunostimulation
Ulcerative colitis
(3) (9) (10) (11)
(2) (4)

[page 5]
endothelial cells 
. Some constituents may have iron
chelation activity 
.
In animal models, hypolipidemic effects occur through increased
fecal cholesterol excretion 
, decreased total cholesterol and
malondialdehyde levels, and increased high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol 
.
Claims that raw wheat grass can “detoxify” the body and that
chlorophyll can augment hemoglobin production are not
supported by scientific evidence.
Adverse Reactions
Nausea, difficulties in swallowing the juice due to strong grass-like
taste 
.
Because wheat grass is grown for a period of 7–10 days before
harvesting leaves, microbial contamination is possible. This may
cause harmful effects upon ingestion.
References
(9) (12)
(13)
(1)
(2)
(9)
1. Kothari S, Jain AK, Mehta SC, et al. Hypolipidemic effect of
fresh Triticum aestivum (wheat) grass juice in
hypercholesterolemic rats. Acta Pol Pharm. Mar-Apr
2011;68(2):291-294.
2. Sethi J, Yadav M, Dahiya K, et al. Antioxidant effect of Triticum
aestivium (wheat grass) in high-fat diet-induced oxidative
stress in rabbits. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. May
2010;32(4):233-235.
3. Shyam R, Singh SN, Vats P, et al. Wheat grass
supplementation decreases oxidative stress in healthy
subjects: a comparative study with spirulina. J Altern
Complement Med. Oct 2007;13(8):789-791.
4. Ben-Arye E, Goldin E, Wengrower D, et al. Wheat grass juice in
the treatment of active distal ulcerative colitis: a randomized
double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Scand J
Gastroenterol. Apr 2002;37(4):444-449.

[page 6]
5. Ng SC, Lam YT, Tsoi KK, et al. Systematic review: the efficacy
of herbal therapy in inflammatory bowel disease. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther. Oct 2013;38(8):854-863.
6. Marawaha RK, Bansal D, Kaur S, et al. Wheat grass juice
reduces transfusion requirement in patients with thalassemia
major: a pilot study. Indian Pediatr. Jul 2004;41(7):716-720.
7. Choudhary DR, Naithani R, Panigrahi I, et al. Effect of wheat
grass therapy on transfusion requirement in beta-thalassemia
major. Indian J Pediatr. Apr 2009;76(4):375-376.
8. Singh K, Pannu MS, Singh P, et al. Effect of wheat grass tablets
on the frequency of blood transfusions in Thalassemia
Major. Indian J Pediatr. Jan 2010;77(1):90-91.
9. Bar-Sela G, Tsalic M, Fried G, et al. Wheat grass juice may
improve hematological toxicity related to chemotherapy in
breast cancer patients: a pilot study. Nutr Cancer.
2007;58(1):43-48.
10. Das A, Raychaudhuri U, Chakraborty R. Effect of freeze drying
and oven drying on antioxidant properties of fresh
wheatgrass. Int J Food Sci Nutr. Sep 2012;63(6):718-721.
11. Shukla V, Vashistha M, Singh SN. Evaluation of antioxidant
profile and activity of amalaki (Emblica officinalis), spirulina
and wheat grass. Indian J Clin Biochem. Jan 2009;24(1):70-
75.
12. Gerritsen ME, Carley WW, Ranges GE, et al. Flavonoids inhibit
cytokine-induced endothelial cell adhesion protein gene
expression. Am J Pathol. Aug 1995;147(2):278-292.
13. Mukhopadhyay S, et al. The role of iron chelation activity of
wheat grass juice in patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome.  J Clin Oncol 27, no. 15S (May 2009) 7012-7012.
14. Kumar N, Iyer U. Impact of Wheatgrass (Triticum aestivum L.)
Supplementation on Atherogenic Lipoproteins and
Menopausal Symptoms in Hyperlipidemic South Asian
Women - A Randomized Controlled Study. J Diet Suppl. Sep
3 2017;14(5):503-513.

[page 7]
Search by name
Go
Email your questions and comments to aboutherbs@mskcc.org .
Last Updated
Friday, March 17, 2023
© 2026 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center