

[page 1]
Donate
©
WHO advises not to use non-
sugar sweeteners for weight
control in newly released
guideline
15 May 2023 
 
Departmental update
|
Reading time: 1 min (390 words)
|
The World Health Organization (WHO) has released a new guideline on non-sugar
sweeteners (NSS), which recommends against the use of NSS to control body weight or
reduce the risk of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs).
The recommendation is based on the findings of a systematic review of the available
evidence which suggests that use of NSS does not confer any long-term benefit in reducing
body fat in adults or children. Results of the review also suggest that there may be potential
undesirable effects from long-term use of NSS, such as an increased risk of type 2 diabetes,
cardiovascular diseases, and mortality in adults.
"Replacing free sugars with NSS does not help with weight control in the long term. People
need to consider other ways to reduce free sugars intake, such as consuming food with
naturally occurring sugars, like fruit, or unsweetened food and beverages,” says Francesco
Branca, WHO Director for Nutrition and Food Safety. "NSS are not essential dietary factors
and have no nutritional value. People should reduce the sweetness of the diet altogether,
starting early in life, to improve their health."
The recommendation applies to all people except individuals with pre-existing diabetes and
includes all synthetic and naturally occurring or modified non-nutritive sweeteners that are
not classified as sugars found in manufactured foods and beverages, or sold on their own

[page 2]
to be added to foods and beverages by consumers. Common NSS include acesulfame K,
aspartame, advantame, cyclamates, neotame, saccharin, sucralose, stevia and stevia
derivatives.
The recommendation does not apply to personal care and hygiene products containing
NSS, such as toothpaste, skin cream, and medications, or to low-calorie sugars and sugar
alcohols (polyols), which are sugars or sugar derivatives containing calories and are
therefore not considered NSS.
Because the link observed in the evidence between NSS and disease outcomes might be
confounded by baseline characteristics of study participants and complicated patterns of
NSS use, the recommendation has been assessed as conditional, following WHO processes
for developing guidelines. This signals that policy decisions based on this recommendation
may require substantive discussion in specific country contexts, linked for example to the
extent of consumption in different age groups.
The WHO guideline on NSS is part of a suite of existing and forthcoming guidelines on
healthy diets that aim to establish lifelong healthy eating habits, improve dietary quality
and decrease the risk of NCDs worldwide.
Nutrition Guidance Expert Advisory Group (NUGAG)