

[page 1]
Donate
WHO multi-country survey
reveals widespread public
misunderstanding about
antibiotic resistance
16 November 2015 
 
 
News release
|
GENEVA
|
Reading time: 8 min (2103 words)
|
العربية中文
Français
Русский
Español
As WHO ramps up its fight against antibiotic resistance, a new multi-country survey shows people are
confused about this major threat to public health and do not understand how to prevent it from growing.
Antibiotic resistance happens when bacteria change and become resistant to the antibiotics
used to treat the infections they cause. Over-use and misuse of antibiotics increase the
development of resistant bacteria, and this survey points out some of the practices, gaps in
understanding and misconceptions which contribute to this phenomenon.
Almost two thirds (64%) of some 10 000 people who were surveyed across 12 countries say
they know antibiotic resistance is an issue that could affect them and their families, but how
it affects them and what they can do to address it are not well understood. For example,
64% of respondents believe antibiotics can be used to treat colds and flu, despite the fact
that antibiotics have no impact on viruses. Close to one third (32%) of people surveyed
believe they should stop taking antibiotics when they feel better, rather than completing the
prescribed course of treatment.
“The rise of antibiotic resistance is a global health crisis, and governments now recognize it
as one of the greatest challenges for public health today. It is reaching dangerously high
levels in all parts of the world,” says Dr Margaret Chan, WHO Director-General, in launching
2026/7/13 21:32
WHO multi-country survey reveals widespread public misunderstanding about antibiotic resistance
https://www.who.int/news/item/16-11-2015-who-multi-country-survey-reveals-widespread-public-misunderstanding-about-antibiotic-resistance
1/7

[page 2]
the survey findings today. “Antibiotic resistance is compromising our ability to treat
infectious diseases and undermining many advances in medicine.”
The survey findings coincide with the launch of a new WHO campaign ‘Antibiotics: Handle
with care’—a global initiative to improve understanding of the problem and change the way
antibiotics are used.
“The findings of this survey point to the urgent need to improve understanding around
antibiotic resistance,” says Dr Keiji Fukuda, Special Representative of the Director-General
for Antimicrobial Resistance. “This campaign is just one of the ways we are working with
governments, health authorities and other partners to reduce antibiotic resistance. One of
the biggest health challenges of the 21st century will require global behaviour change by
individuals and societies.”
The multi-country survey included 14 questions on the use of antibiotics, knowledge of
antibiotics and of antibiotic resistance, and used a mix of online and face-to-face interviews.
It was conducted in 12 countries: Barbados, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Serbia, South Africa, Sudan and Viet Nam. While not claiming to be
exhaustive, this and other surveys will help WHO and partners to determine the key gaps in
public understanding of the problem and misconceptions about how to use antibiotics to
be addressed through the campaign.
Some common misconceptions revealed by
the survey include:
Three quarters (76%) of  respondents think that antibiotic resistance happens when the body
becomes resistant to antibiotics. In fact bacteria—not humans or animals—become resistant to
antibiotics and their spread causes hard-to-treat infections.
Two thirds (66%) of  respondents believe that individuals are not at risk of  a drug-resistant
infection if  they personally take their antibiotics as prescribed. Nearly half  (44%) of  people
surveyed think antibiotic resistance is only a problem for people who take antibiotics regularly. In
fact, anyone, of  any age, in any country can get an antibiotic-resistant infection.
More than half  (57%) of  respondents feel there is not much they can do to stop antibiotic
resistance, while nearly two thirds (64%) believe medical experts will solve the problem before it
becomes too serious.
Another key finding of the survey was that almost three quarters (73%) of respondents say
farmers should give fewer antibiotics to food-producing animals.
2026/7/13 21:32
WHO multi-country survey reveals widespread public misunderstanding about antibiotic resistance
https://www.who.int/news/item/16-11-2015-who-multi-country-survey-reveals-widespread-public-misunderstanding-about-antibiotic-resistance
2/7

[page 3]
To address this growing problem, a global action plan to tackle antimicrobial resistance was
endorsed at the World Health Assembly in May 2015. One of the plan’s 5 objectives is to
improve awareness and understanding of antibiotic resistance through effective
communication, education and training.
Key findings of the survey by country
Barbados (507 face-to-face interviews)
Only 35% of respondents say they have taken antibiotics within the past 6 months—the
lowest proportion of any country included in the survey; of those who have taken
antibiotics, 91% say they were prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse.
Fewer than half of respondents (43%) have heard of the term ‘antibiotic resistance’; and
fewer than half (46%)—less than any other country in the survey—believe that many
infections are becoming increasingly resistant to treatment by antibiotics.
Only 27% of respondents agree with the statements ‘Antibiotic resistance is one of the
biggest problems the world faces’ and that ‘Experts will solve the problem’—the lowest
proportion of all participating countries for both questions.
China (1,002 online interviews)
57% of respondents report taking antibiotics within the past 6 months; 74% say they were
prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse; 5% say they purchased them on the internet.
More than half (53%) of respondents wrongly believe that they should stop taking
antibiotics when they feel better, rather than taking the full course as directed.
61% of respondents think, incorrectly, that colds and flu can be treated by antibiotics.
Two thirds (67%) of respondents are familiar with the term ‘antibiotic resistance’ and three
quarters (75%) say it is ‘one of the biggest problems in the world’.
83% of respondents say that farmers should give fewer antibiotics to animals—the highest
proportion of any country in the survey.
Egypt (511 face-to-face interviews)
More than three quarters (76%) of respondents say they have taken antibiotics within the
past 6 months, and 72% say they were prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse.
2026/7/13 21:32
WHO multi-country survey reveals widespread public misunderstanding about antibiotic resistance
https://www.who.int/news/item/16-11-2015-who-multi-country-survey-reveals-widespread-public-misunderstanding-about-antibiotic-resistance
3/7

[page 4]
55% of respondents incorrectly think that they should stop taking antibiotics when they feel
better, rather than taking the full course; and more than three quarters (76%) wrongly
believe that antibiotics can be used to treat colds and flu.
Less than one quarter (22%) of respondents have heard of the term ‘antibiotic resistance’—
the lowest proportion of any country included in the survey.
India (1,023 online interviews)
More than three quarters (76%) of respondents report having taken antibiotics within the
past 6 months; 90% say they were prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse.
Three quarters (75%) of respondents think, incorrectly, that colds and flu can be treated
with antibiotics; and only 58% know that they should stop taking antibiotics only when they
finish the course as directed.
While 75% agree that antibiotic resistance is one of the biggest problems in the world, 72%
of respondents believe experts will solve the problem before it becomes too serious.
Indonesia (1,027 online interviews)
Two thirds (66%) of respondents report having taken antibiotics in the past 6 months; 83%
of respondents say they were prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse.
More than three quarters (76%) of respondents know that they should only stop taking
antibiotics when they have taken all of them as directed, but 63% incorrectly think they can
be used to treat colds and flu.
84% of respondents are familiar with the term ‘antibiotic resistance’ and two thirds (67%)
believe that many infections are becoming increasingly resistant to treatment by
antibiotics.
Mexico (1,001 online interviews)
Three quarters (75%) of respondents report having taken antibiotics within the past 6
months; 92% say they were prescribed by a doctor or nurse; and 97% say they got them
from a pharmacy or medical store.
The majority of respondents (83%) accurately identify that bladder/urinary tract infections
(UTIs) can be treated with antibiotics, but 61% wrongly believe that colds and flu can be
treated with antibiotics.
2026/7/13 21:32
WHO multi-country survey reveals widespread public misunderstanding about antibiotic resistance
https://www.who.int/news/item/16-11-2015-who-multi-country-survey-reveals-widespread-public-misunderstanding-about-antibiotic-resistance
4/7

[page 5]
89% of respondents in Mexico say they have heard of the term ‘antibiotic resistance’ and
84% believe many infections are becoming increasingly resistant to treatment by antibiotics
—a higher proportion than any other country included in the survey on both questions.
Nigeria (664 face-to-face interviews)
Almost three quarters (73%) of respondents report taking antibiotics within the past 6
months; 75% of respondents state they were prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse;
5% say they bought them from a stall or hawker.
More respondents in Nigeria than any other country included in the survey correctly
identify that antibiotics do not work for colds and flu (47%), however 44% of respondents
think they do.
Only 38% of respondents have heard of the term ‘antibiotic resistance’—the second lowest
proportion of all the countries surveyed.
Russian Federation (1,007 online
interviews)
A little more than half of respondents (56%) report having taken antibiotics within the past
6 months; the same proportion (56%) say their most recent course of antibiotics was
prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse—the lowest proportion of any country included
in the survey.
Two thirds (67%) of respondents incorrectly think colds and flu can be treated with
antibiotics, and more than one quarter (26%) think they should stop taking antibiotics when
they feel better rather than taking the full course as directed.
Awareness of the term ‘antibiotic resistance’ was high among respondents at 82%.
71% think antibiotics are widely used in agriculture in their country and 81% say that
farmers should give fewer antibiotics to animals.
Serbia (510 face-to-face interviews)
Fewer than half (48%) of respondents say they have taken antibiotics within the past 6
months; 81% say they were prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse.
2026/7/13 21:32
WHO multi-country survey reveals widespread public misunderstanding about antibiotic resistance
https://www.who.int/news/item/16-11-2015-who-multi-country-survey-reveals-widespread-public-misunderstanding-about-antibiotic-resistance
5/7

[page 6]
The majority of respondents (83%) accurately identify that bladder infections/UTIs can be
treated with antibiotics, but more than two thirds (68%) wrongly believe that colds and flu
can be treated with antibiotics.
Only 60% of respondents in Serbia have heard of the term ‘antibiotic resistance’ and only
one third (33%) think it is one of the biggest problems the world faces.
81% of respondents say that farmers should give fewer antibiotics to animals.
South Africa (1,002 online interviews)
65% of respondents say they have taken antibiotics within the past 6 months; a higher
proportion of people than any other country included in the survey (93%) say their last
course of antibiotics was prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse, and 95% say they had
advice from a medical professional on how to take them.
87% of respondents know they should only stop taking antibiotics when they finish the
course of treatment—a higher proportion than any other country included in the survey.
The same proportion (87%) of respondents—and again more than any other country in the
survey—recognize that the statement ‘It’s OK to use antibiotics that were given to a friend
of family member, as long as they were used to treat the same illness’ is false. It is a practice
which can encourage the development of resistance.
Sudan (518 face-to-face interviews)
More than three quarters (76%) of respondents report having taken antibiotics within the
past 6 months; 91% say they were prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse.
62% of respondents incorrectly think they should stop taking antibiotics when they feel
better—more than any other country included in the survey—and 80% think antibiotics can
be used to treat colds and flu. Both of these statements are incorrect. These are practices
which encourage the development of antibiotic resistance.
94% of respondents agree that people should use antibiotics only when prescribed, and
79% believe that antibiotic resistance is one of the biggest problems the world faces—the
highest percentages on both questions of any of the countries where the survey was
undertaken.
2026/7/13 21:32
WHO multi-country survey reveals widespread public misunderstanding about antibiotic resistance
https://www.who.int/news/item/16-11-2015-who-multi-country-survey-reveals-widespread-public-misunderstanding-about-antibiotic-resistance
6/7

[page 7]
Viet Nam (1,000 online interviews)
71% of respondents state they have taken antibiotics within the past 6 months; three
quarters (75%) report they were prescribed or provided by a doctor or nurse.
86% of respondents think that the body becomes resistant to antibiotics (whereas in fact it
is bacteria)—a higher proportion than any other country included in the survey.
83% think that many infections are becoming increasingly resistant to antibiotics.
70% of respondents think that antibiotics are widely used in agriculture in their country and
almost three quarters (74%) agree that ‘antibiotic resistance is one of the biggest problems
the world faces’.
Notes to editors
About the survey
The multi-country survey was limited to 2 countries per WHO Region, 12 countries overall.
Data cannot be considered to be representative of each Region, nor of the global situation.
Fieldwork was carried out by research agency 2CV between 14 September and 16 October
2015. A total of 9772 respondents completed the 14 question survey either online or during
a face-to-face street interview. Document with key findings:
About the ‘Antibiotics: Handle with care’ campaign
WHO is launching a global campaign, ‘Antibiotics: Handle with care’, during the first World
Antibiotic Awareness Week, 16-22 November 2015. The aim of the campaign is to raise
awareness and encourage best practices among the public, policymakers, health and
agriculture professionals to avoid the further emergence and spread of antibiotic
resistance. For more information and to download campaign materials:
2026/7/13 21:32
WHO multi-country survey reveals widespread public misunderstanding about antibiotic resistance
https://www.who.int/news/item/16-11-2015-who-multi-country-survey-reveals-widespread-public-misunderstanding-about-antibiotic-resistance
7/7