

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Zinc supplementation
during pregnancy
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
The central role of zinc in cell division, protein synthesis and growth means that an
adequate supply of zinc is especially important for pregnant women. During pregnancy,
zinc and other micronutrient deficiencies are common due to increased nutrient
requirements of the mother and the developing fetus. These deficiencies can negatively
impact pregnancy outcomes including the health of the mother and newborn infant.
The available evidence suggests that zinc supplementation during pregnancy may help
to reduce preterm births in low-income settings, but does not prevent other suboptimal
pregnancy outcomes including low-birth-weight or pre-eclampsia.
WHO Recommendations

[page 2]
Zinc supplementation for pregnant women is only recommended in the context of
rigorous research.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy
experience
GRC-approved guidelines
Evidence
Systematic reviews used to develop the guidelines
Zinc supplementation for improving pregnancy and infant outcome
Ota E, Mori R, Middleton P, Tobe-Gai R, Mahomed K, Miyazaki C, Bhutta ZA. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2015; Issue 2. Art. No.: CD000230.
Summary of this review 
Related systematic reviews
Effect of Zinc Supplementation on Pregnancy and Infant Outcomes: A Systematic Review
Chaffee BW, King JC. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology. 2012; 26(s1):118–137.
A systematic review of effect of prenatal zinc supplementation on birthweight: meta-analysis
of 17 randomized controlled trials
Gebreselassie SG, Gashe FE. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition. 2011; 29(2).
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness
Implementation of this intervention is not recommended.

[page 3]
Guidelines have been recently
approved by the WHO Guidelines
Review Committee
Learn More 
Category 1 Intervention
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO