

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Zinc supplementation
in children with
respiratory infections
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Pneumonia is a severe form of acute lower respiratory tract infection and is the leading
cause of death in children under 5 years of age worldwide.
Zinc is important for cellular growth, cellular differentiation and metabolism and
deficiency limits childhood growth and decreases resistance to infections. Although
severe zinc deficiency is rare in humans, mild to moderate deficiency may be common
worldwide.
Several studies have suggested that zinc supplementation may reduce the frequency
and severity of respiratory infections in children, however results thus far have been

[page 2]
inconsistent.
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Zinc supplementation for the prevention of pneumonia in children aged 2 months to 59
months
Lassi ZS, Moin A, Bhutta ZA. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016; Issue 12. Art. No.: CD005978.
Summary of this review 
Zinc supplementation for preventing mortality, morbidity, and growth failure in children aged
6 months to 12 years of age
Mayo-Wilson E, Junior JA, Imdad A, Dean S, Chan XHS, Chan ES, et al. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2014; Issue 5. Art. No.: CD009384.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Preventive zinc supplementation in developing countries: impact on mortality and morbidity
due to diarrhea, pneumonia and malaria
Yakoob MY, Theodoratou E, Jabeen A, Imdad A, Eisele TP, Ferguson J, et al. BMC Public Health. 2011;11
Suppl 3:S23.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness

[page 3]
Implementation of this intervention is not recommended.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Zinc supplementation to improve
treatment outcomes among children
diagnosed with respiratory
infections
Zinc Supplementation in Children
With Respiratory Infections
Category 2 intervention
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Commentary
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters

[page 4]
Report misconduct
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO