

[page 1]
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions
(eLENA)
An online library of evidence-informed guidelines for nutrition interventions and single
point of reference for the latest nutrition guidelines, recommendations and related
information.
Overview
Interventions
Glossary
About
 All interventions
Zinc supplementation
and growth in children
Intervention | Last updated: 9 August 2023
Approximately 155 million children under five years of age are stunted (height-for-age
<-2 SD below the WHO Child Growth Standards median), with the vast majority living in
Africa and Asia.
Zinc is important for cellular growth, cellular differentiation and metabolism and
deficiency limits childhood growth and decreases resistance to infections. Although
severe zinc deficiency is rare in humans, mild to moderate deficiency may be common
worldwide.
The available evidence is inconsistent, but suggests that zinc supplementation may help
to improve linear growth of children under 5 years of age.

[page 2]
WHO Recommendations
Further research is needed before specific recommendations can be made.
Learn More 
Guidelines and guidance documents
GRC-approved guidelines
Status: Not currently available
Evidence
Related Cochrane reviews
Zinc supplementation for preventing mortality, morbidity, and growth failure in children aged
6 months to 12 years of age
Mayo-Wilson E, Junior JA, Imdad A, Dean S, Chan XHS, Chan ES, et al. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2014; Issue 5. Art. No.: CD009384.
Summary of this review 
Other related systematic reviews
Effect of preventive zinc supplementation on linear growth in children under 5 years of age in
developing countries: a meta-analysis of studies for input to the lives saved tool
Imdad A, Bhutta ZA. BMC Public Health. 2011; 11(Suppl. 3):S22.
Preventive zinc supplementation among infants, preschoolers, and older prepubertal children
Brown KH, Peerson JM, Baker SK, Hess SY. Food & Nutrition Bulletin. 2009; 30(Suppl. 1):S12-40.
Effects of micronutrients on growth of children under 5 y of age: meta-analyses of single and
multiple nutrient interventions
Ramakrishnan U, Nguyen P, Martorell R. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2009; 89(1):191–203.
Learn More 
Cost-effectiveness

[page 3]
Relevant cost-effectiveness analyses have not yet been identified.
Systematic review(s) have been
conducted but no recent guidelines yet
available that have been approved by
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
Learn More 
Zinc supplementation and growth in
children
Category 2 intervention
Biological, behavioural and contextual
rationale
Regions

Policies

About us

Contact us

Newsletters
Report misconduct

[page 4]
Privacy policy
© 2026 WHO